Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


Hardware-Based Encryption 00:00-00:16

Many encryption systems are managed by the operating system or other software, but there are also some hardware options for encryption. In this lesson, we'll look at the two of the most common hardware options, the TPM and HSM.

TPM 00:16-01:53

The Trusted Platform Module, or TPM, is a physical chip that resides on the motherboard. It's responsible for providing some cryptographic services. Using a hardware chip means that the encryption system itself can't be attacked by malicious software. The latest version, TPM 2.0, was released in 2014. TPM chips can be used for checking key system components at startup and for protecting and generating encryption keys and passwords.

One key function of the TPM chip is to check key system components during startup. When the system is turned on, the TPM checks to make sure everything seems normal. If the TPM detects anything out of sorts, it doesn't allow the system to boot, which prevents data from being extracted.

The TPM is also used to store and generate encryption keys. In essence, TPM provides an encrypted lockbox where user passwords, encryption keys, and digital certificates can be kept safe.

For example, Windows 10 can pull these keys directly from the TPM without loading them into the RAM, where they would be more vulnerable to attack.

When encryption keys are generated, they usually need a random number to be generated too. This is a weak spot in encryption since most software number generators contain patterns and are not truly random.

The TPM chip can be used to generate completely random numbers for the encryption process, which increases the effectiveness of the encryption keys.

A TPM chip can also greatly increase the security of a system. Some popular Windows features such as BitLocker and Credential Guard rely on the TPM chip to perform at their most secure level.

Hardware Security Module (HSM) 01:53-02:52

A hardware security module, or HSM, is very similar to a TPM. You might also hear these devices referred to as a Personal Computer Security Module or Secure Application Module. One of key differences is that an HSM is a removable device, whereas the TPM is built into the motherboard.

One major benefit of HSMs is that they're more powerful than TPM chips. HSMs are designed to be powerful cryptographic devices with better hardware capabilities. This allows HSMs to perform multiple security operations for multiple users. Some HSM devices can even be attached to a server to handle cryptographic functions for an entire network.

HSM devices perform many of the same functions as a TPM, such as generating and storing encryption keys, but they can also be used to generate and validate digital signatures and generate keys used in smart cards. Consumer-grade HSM devices have become much more affordable over the past few years, making them more accessible than before.

Summary 02:52-03:13

And that's it for this lesson. In this video, we've covered two options for hardware-based encryption. The TPM chip is built into the motherboard. It checks key hardware components during startup and generates and stores encryption keys. And HSMs are add-on devices that perform many of the same functions as a TPM chip, but are much more powerful.