Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


PGP and GPG 00:00-00:29

When you're encrypting files or emails, you need the help of a utility. Windows automates this process with either BitLocker or EFS. In a Unix-based operating system, such as Linux or Apple's OS X, we can use GNU Privacy Guard, or GPG. GPG is based on an older utility, Pretty Good Privacy, or PGP. In this lesson, we'll cover how both utilities work and how to use them.

Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) 00:29-01:24

PGP is an encryption program first developed in 1991 based on the OpenPGP standard. PGP combines the use of symmetric and asymmetric keys and can be used to send encrypted messages and encrypt data.

To encrypt data, PGP generates a large, random one-time use session key that's used for encryption. The session key is then encrypted using the receiver's public key, and both are combined to send the encrypted message.

When the receiver gets the message, they use their private key to decrypt the session key, which is then used to decrypt the message.

Even though PGP is an old utility, it's still considered the standard for encrypting messages, because at the time this video was recorded, it's never been cracked. PGP was purchased a while ago and commercialized. It's owned by NortonLifeLock, formally known as Symantec, and provides products that can protect all sorts of devices, even smartphones.

GNU Privacy Guard (GPG) 01:24-02:04

In response to PGP becoming a commercial product, GNU Privacy Guard was created in 1999. GPG is a command line utility that's used to encrypt and decrypt data and messages. GPG functions just like PGP. It uses both symmetric and asymmetric keys to encrypt and secure data and messages.

To generate a random session key, the user performs actions on the computer, such as typing on the keyboard or moving the mouse. This helps to ensure that the key is truly random.

Because it's an open-sourced utility, GPG can be used on many different systems, including Windows, Linux, Android, and Apple's OS X.

Summary 02:04-02:27

That wraps up this lesson. In this video, we looked at two popular utilities for encrypting files and messages, Pretty Good Privacy and GNU Privacy Guard. Both utilities use a hybrid cryptographic model and are very secure. The biggest difference between them is that PGP is a commercial product, and GPG is a free open-source utility.