Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


Certificate Types 00:00-00:27

Depending on your purpose, there are different types of public key infrastructure certificates, or PKI certificates. These certificates are used to verify an organization's identity and ownership of the public key. In this lesson, I'll cover these types of certificates and how you can use them. I'll also go over some different validation levels used for SSL certificates.

Root Certificates 00:27-00:48

A root certificate is the first certificate that a Certificate Authority, or CA, creates. This certificate is self-signed and is used to sign lower-level certificates, such as intermediate certificates. These certificates go through different processes to be approved, and the process depends on the certificate and organization.

Subject Alternative Name (SAN) Certificates 00:48-01:04

Subject Alternative Name certificates, or SAN certificates, allow an organization to cover multiple domains. For example, TestOut could cover testout.com, testout.net, or even labsim.com with the same certificate.

Wildcard certificates are like SAN certificates.

Wildcard Certificates 01:04-01:21

Wildcard certificates allow an organization to cover unlimited subdomains. For example, TestOut could cover any site that ended in testout.com with the same wildcard certificate.

Code-Signing Certificates 01:21-01:35

Code-signing certificates are used by app developers to prove that an application is legitimate and hasn't been altered or compromised. When the user installs a program and there's no certificate, they receive a warning that they shouldn't trust the app.

Self-Signed Certificates 01:35-01:55

Self-signed certificates are certificates that haven't been validated and signed by a CA. These certificates are easy and free to make, but they don't provide the same protection and security as a CA-validated certificate. If a website uses a self-signed certificate, the user sees a warning when visiting the site.

Email Certificates 01:55-02:16

Secure, encrypted emails are generally sent using the S/MIME Protocol. When you send secure emails, you need to know the recipient's public key, which you find in email certificates. These certificates are usually used within an organization that uses its own CA, but some public CAs also provide email certificates.

User and Computer Certificates 02:16-02:29

You can use certificates to identify and validate individual users and computers. You generally see these kinds of certificates in a network environment where they're used to validate a computer or user to the server.

Validation Levels 02:29-03:52

The most common use for certificates is for websites that use SSL or TLS. These certificates validate that the website is authentic and secure so that users feel safe.

When a site wants to purchase a certificate, there are three different validation levels a CA can offer. These are domain validation, organization validation, and extended validation.

Domain validation is the lowest level and isn't very secure. A CA issues a domain-validated certificate to anyone who's listed as the domain administrator in the WHOIS record. The CA usually validates this with a simple phone call or email, which isn't hard to spoof. These certificates can be issued usually within a matter of minutes.

An organization validation requires the certificate purchaser to not only prove that they're a domain administrator, but also that the organization is real. This process varies with each CA, but it's more in-depth than a domain validation. These certificates may take 1 to 3 days to be issued.

Extended validation is the highest level of trust. An extended validation requires the purchaser to prove that they're the domain administrator and also requires a much more thorough vetting of the organization itself. These certificates may take 1 to 5 days to be issued.

Summary 03:52-04:06

That's it for this lesson. In this lesson, we discussed the different types of PKI certificates and how CAs implement them. We also looked at the three validation levels for SSL certificates and how each level differs.