Security Pro 8.0

10.2.5 Virtual Networking Facts

This lesson covers the following topics:

Virtual networks
Virtual networking devices
Virtual Networks

A virtual network is a computer network consisting of virtual and physical devices. Organizations generally use virtual devices to save money. By using less physical storage space, a company is able to have considerably more devices in a network while using very little space in a data center. With virtualization, companies can take advantage of the efficiency and agility of software-based devices and storage resources.

The physical networking devices are responsible for the forwarding of packets, while the virtual network (software) provides an intelligent abstraction that makes it easy to deploy and manage network services and underlying network resources.

The following are some network virtualization terms to be familiar with:

Term
Description
Virtual local area network (VLAN)	A VLAN's primary use is to split up a single physical LAN into multiple logical LANs for segmentation and isolation, but under the right conditions, can also make several physical LANs function as a single logical LAN.
Virtual area network (VAN)	This is a virtual LAN running on top of a physical LAN. This configuration enables guest virtual machines on separate physical hosts to communicate.
Virtual private network (VPN)	A VPN is usually used as a secure tunnel over another network, connecting multiple remote end-points, such as routers. A multipoint VPN is a VPN connecting more than two end-points.
Virtual machine (VM)	VMs are virtual computers that function like a physical computer. Virtual servers are virtual machines capable of providing services such as databases, email, domains, and applications. The traffic between virtual machines can be routed using virtual switches alongside virtual routers and virtual firewalls for network segmentation and data isolation.
Virtual Networking Devices

The following table describes virtual networking devices that can be used to create a more secure network.

Device
Description
Virtual switch (vSwitch)	Software that facilitates communication between virtual machines and physical networks. It operates layer 2 of the OSI model and inspects and forwards data packets. A vSwitch may be a part of software installed in the virtual machine or part of the server firmware.
Virtual router (vRouter)	A software function that replicates the functionality of a physical router. Because virtual routing liberates the IP routing function from specific hardware, you can more freely move routing functions around a network.
Virtual firewall appliance (VFA)	Software that functions as a network firewall device that provides the usual packet filtering and monitoring. The VF can run as a traditional software firewall on a virtual machine.
Virtual machine monitor/hypervisor (VMM/hypervisor)	Software, firmware, or hardware that creates and runs virtual machines. A computer on which a hypervisor runs to provide one or more virtual machines is called a host machine. Each virtual machine is called a guest machine. The hypervisor provides the guest operating systems with a virtual operating platform and manages the execution of the guest operating systems.
