Security Pro 8.0

10.4.5 Cloud Storage Security Facts

This lesson covers the following topics:

Cloud storage
Advantages of cloud storage
Cloud Storage

Cloud storage is a data storage model. It is usually provided by a third party as a service. Some of the most widely used cloud storage for enterprise providers are Google Cloud, Amazon Web Services, and Microsoft Azure. Many companies take advantage of cloud services to decrease costs and meet ever-increasing storage needs.

Cloud storage services may be accessed through a co-located cloud computer service, a web service application programming interface (API), or applications that utilize the API. Cloud desktop storage that uses a cloud storage gateway or web-based content management system is an example of an application that uses the API.

A cloud access security broker (CASB) may act as a gatekeeper, extending an organization's security policies into the cloud storage infrastructure. A CASB focuses on the visibility of the company data, regulation compliance, user access to prevent threats, and data security through encryption and loss prevention.

Cloud storage is:

Made up of many distributed resources but still acts as one in a federated or cooperative storage cloud architecture.
Highly fault tolerant through redundancy and distribution of data.
Highly durable through the creation of versioned copies.
Cloud Storage is a virtual service; the infrastructure is the responsibility of the storage provider. Access controls should be set in the same way as a local file system would be set. There is no need for the provider to have access to the stored data. Measures for securing cloud storage include:

Implement security controls in the same way as in a physical datacenter.
Use data classification policies.
Assign information into categories that determine storage, handling, and access requirements.
Assign security classification based on information sensitivity and criticality.
Use specialized tools to dispose of data securely when it is no longer needed.
Advantages of Cloud Storage

The advantages of Cloud Storage are:

Companies pay only for the storage used. This does not necessarily mean that cloud storage is less expensive, but it incurs only operating expenses.
Cloud storage can cut energy consumption by up to 70%, making an organization more green.
Organizations can choose between off-premises and on-premises cloud storage options or a mixture of the two options.
Storage availability and data protection are intrinsic to object storage architecture. Depending on the application, you can eliminate the costs, effort, and additional technology to add availability and protection.
Storage maintenance tasks, such as purchasing additional storage capacity, are the responsibility of the service provider.
Cloud storage can be used to copy virtual machine images from the cloud to on-premises locations or import a virtual machine image from an on-premises location to the cloud image library.
Cloud storage can be used as natural disaster backup since cloud storage providers' backup servers are typically located in different places around the globe.
