Security Pro 8.0

10.4.4 Cloud Computing Facts

This lesson covers the following topics:

Cloud computing
Types of clouds
Cloud computing models
Cloud security risk reduction
Threat actors and attack surfaces
Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI)
Cloud Computing

Cloud computing is software, data access, computation, and storage services provided to clients through the internet. The term cloud is a metaphor for the internet. It is based on the basic cloud drawing used to represent the telephone network. It is now used to describe the internet infrastructure in computer network diagrams. Characteristics of cloud computing include:

Delivery of common business applications that are accessed from a web service or software (like a web browser).
The cloud connection can exist over the internet or a LAN.
Cloud computing does not require end-user knowledge of the physical location and configuration of the system that delivers the services.
Types of clouds

Cloud computing can be implemented in several different ways, including the following:

Type
Description
Public cloud	A public cloud can be accessed by anyone. Cloud-based computing resources, such as platforms, applications, storage, or other resources, are made available to the general public by a cloud service provider. The service provider may or may not require a fee for using these resources. For example, Google provides many publicly accessible cloud applications, such as Gmail and Google Docs.
Private cloud	A private cloud provides resources to a single organization. Access is restricted to the users within the organization. Private clouds can be hosted internally. Because of the expense and expertise required to implement, clouds are typically hosted externally by a third party. An organization commonly enters into an agreement with a cloud service provider, which provides secure access to cloud-based resources. The organization's data is kept separate and secure from any other organization using the same service provider.
Community cloud	A community cloud is designed to be shared by several organizations. Access is restricted to users within the organizations who are sharing the community cloud infrastructure. Community clouds can be hosted internally or on-premise, with each organization sharing the cost of implementation and maintenance. Because of the expense and expertise required, community clouds are commonly hosted externally by a third party.
Hybrid cloud	A hybrid cloud is composed of a combination of public, private, and community cloud resources from different service providers. The goal behind a hybrid cloud is to expand the functionality of a given cloud service by integrating it with other cloud services.
The advantages of cloud computing are:

Flexible access.
Ease of use.
Self-service resource provisioning.
API availability.
Service metering.
The ability to try software applications in cloud computing service models.
Cloud Computing Models

Cloud computing service models include the following:

Model
Description
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)	IaaS delivers infrastructure to the client, such as processing, storage, networks, and virtualized environments. The client deploys and runs software without purchasing servers, data center space, or network equipment.
Platform as a Service (PaaS)	PaaS delivers everything a developer needs to build an application. The deployment comes without the cost and complexity of buying and managing the underlying hardware and software layers.
Software as a Service (SaaS)	
SaaS delivers software applications to the client over the internet or on a local area network. SaaS comes in two implementation types:

Simple multi-tenancy in which each customer has its own resources that are segregated from other customers.
Fine grain multi-tenancy segregates customers, but resources are shared.
Security as a Service (SECaaS)	
SECaaS providers integrate their services into a corporate infrastructure. The applications and software are specific to organizational security. SECaaS is based on the Software-as-a-Service cloud computing model but is limited to information security services and does not require on-premises hardware. These security services can include authentication, anti-virus, anti-malware, spyware, intrusion detection, penetration testing, and security event management.

SECaaS can sometimes be much more cost-effective for an organization than having to pay for all the necessary equipment and personnel to properly protect a network from viruses, malware, and instruction. However, it is still necessary to have an on-site security professional.
Cloud Security Risk Reduction

Cloud service providers reduce the risk of security breaches through the following actions.

Authenticate all users who access the service and allow users to access only the applications and data that they need.
Use a Cloud Access Security Broker (CASB). A CASB is a software tool or service that sits between an organization and a cloud service provider. Its job is to make sure that all communication and access to the cloud service provider complies with the organization's security policies and procedures.
Segregate each organization's centrally stored data.
Verify, test, and apply updates to the infrastructure.
Establish a formal process for all facets of the service, from user requests to major data breaches and catastrophic events.
Implement security monitoring for usage, unusual behavior, and other events.
Implement encryption up to the point of use, such as the client's web browser.
Probe for security holes with a third-party service provider.
Comply with all regulatory measures, such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
Threat Actors and Attack Surfaces

The attack surface is all the points at which a malicious threat actor could try to exploit a vulnerability. Any location or method where a threat actor can interact with a network port, app, computer, or user is part of a potential attack surface. Minimizing the attack surface means restricting access so that only a few known endpoints, protocols/ports, and services/methods are permitted. Each of these must be assessed for vulnerabilities and monitored for intrusions.

One potential threat to cloud services is what can be referred to as the supply chain. Because cloud services are used by organizations and other customers to create a number of possible end products and services, they can be considered a link in a supply chain. A supply chain is an end-to-end process of designing, manufacturing, and distributing goods and services to customers. Rather than attack the target directly, a threat actor may seek ways to infiltrate it via companies in its supply chain, such as an IaaS, PaaS, or SaaS.

The supply chain breadth and complexity expose organizations to a huge attack surface. For example, for a computer motherboard to be trustworthy, the supply chain of chip manufacturer, firmware code developer, OEM reseller, courier delivery company, and administrative staff responsible for provisioning the computing device to the end user must all be trustworthy. Anyone with the time and resources to modify the computer's firmware could create backdoor access. The same is true for any computer or network hardware, software, or service. This means that when employing companies offering cloud services, you must trust that their hardware, software, and services are secure.

Another important consideration regarding the supply chain is a Managed Services Provider (MSP). MSP provisions and supports IT resources such as networks, security, or web infrastructure. MSPs are useful when an organization finds it cheaper or more reliable to outsource all or part of IT provision rather than try to manage it directly. From a security point of view, this type of outsourcing is complex, as it can be difficult to monitor the MSP. The MSP's employees are all potential sources of insider threat.

Establishing a trusted supply chain for computer equipment and services essentially means denying malicious actors the time or resources to modify the assets supplied. For most businesses, using reputable vendors will represent the best practical effort at securing the supply chain. Government, military/security services, and large enterprises will exercise greater scrutiny. Particular care should be taken if using secondhand machines.
Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI)

Cloud-based services can be hosted externally by third-party service providers or internally on your own virtualization infrastructure. For example, internal private clouds are commonly used to provide a VDI. Using VDI, user desktops are virtualized, running on high-end hardware in the data center instead of the end user's workstation hardware. The physical workstation is merely used to establish a remote connection to the user's virtualized desktop. This is sometimes called a thin client deployment because most of the computing power is provided by servers in the data center. Traditional deployments, where most of the processing load is handled by the local workstation, are called thick client deployments.

Using VDI provides increased flexibility, enhanced security, efficient management, and better data protection than the traditional workstation-based desktop model. Consider the following advantages:

Workstation hardware costs are reduced. Only minimal workstation hardware is required to run a Remote Desktop (Windows) or VNC (Linux) client and connect to the private cloud.
User data on the desktop can be protected centrally by backing up the hypervisors where the virtualized desktops are running. There is no need to back up physical workstations separately.
If a user's physical workstation fails, no data is lost. The user can access the virtualized desktop from a different workstation while the failed hardware is repaired or replaced.
If a widespread malware infection hits multiple user desktops, the affected virtual systems can be quickly re-imaged on the hypervisor. There is no need to push large images down to end users' workstations over the network.
If a user loses a device, such as a notebook or tablet, there is much less of a chance that critical data will be compromised because no data is saved on the device.
