Security Pro 8.0

8.2.2 File System Security Facts

Managing the file system is a primary concern of IT professionals. The file system is responsible for storing and securing data. An organization depends on data and requires that it be secure and easily accessible.

This lesson covers the following topics.

File system security
Least privilege permission assignments
Data transfer security protocols
File System Security

Tasks to secure file servers include:

Prevent physical access.
Implement the principle of least privilege.
Use full-disk encryption on backups.
Implement strong authentication.
Remove unnecessary software and disable unused services.
Use implicit deny access control lists (ACLs).
Use hidden folders and files.
Audit the file system.
When managing the security of the file system, be aware of the following:

The transfer of files between a client and a server is often unsecured. Use IPSec or a VPN between the server and the client to secure data as it travels through the network.
File and print resources are primarily vulnerable to denial-of-service (DoS) and access attacks.
Attacks on file servers are often directed against the NetBIOS protocol. To protect the server, verify that NetBIOS is not required on the server, disable the NetBIOS protocol on the server, and use a host-based firewall to close NetBIOS ports 135 and 137 - 139.
A shared folder is a folder whose contents are available over the network.
An administrative share is a shared folder that is available only to an administrative user.
Administrative shares are hidden. This means that the share will not display when a user browses a network computer.
By default, the root of every drive is an administrative share.
In Windows, you can create hidden shares by appending a $ sign to the end of the share name (for example, DataFiles$).
Users must know the name of the share to access it and have the appropriate access permissions.
Do not share the root directory with regular users.
With Windows Server 2008 and later, you can use File Server Resource Manager (FSRM) to control files saved on a file server.
Quotas limit the amount of data that can be saved within a folder. A hard limit prevents exceeding the quota limit, while a soft limit sends a message when the limit is exceeded.
File screens restrict the type of files that can be saved in a folder. For example, you can prevent media files (audio and video) or files with specific file extensions from being saved. An active file screen prevents saving the specified file types, while a passive screen monitors when the specified file types are added to the folder.
Least Privilege Permission Assignments

Least privilege means that a principal is granted the minimum possible sufficient rights to complete a task they are authorized to perform. This mitigates risk if an account should be compromised and fall under the control of a threat actor. Least privilege involves a design phase, where analysis of business workflows determines what roles and permissions are required.

While least privilege is a strong design principle, implementing it successfully can be challenging. Where many users, groups, roles, and resources are involved, managing permission assignments and implications is complex and time-consuming. Improperly configured accounts can have two different impacts. On the one hand, setting privileges that are too restrictive creates a large volume of support calls and reduces productivity. On the other hand, granting too many privileges to users weakens the system's security and increases the risk of malware infection and a data breach.

Ensuring least privilege also involves continual monitoring to prevent authorization creep. Authorization creep refers to a situation where a user acquires more and more rights, either directly or by being added to security groups or roles.

For example, a user may be granted elevated privileges temporarily. In this case, a system is needed to ensure that the privileges are revoked at the end of the agreed period. A system of auditing should regularly review privileges, monitor group membership, review access control lists for each resource, and identify and disable unnecessary accounts.

Determining effective permissions for a shared folder. (Screenshot used with permission from Microsoft.)

Provisioning is the process of setting up a service according to a standard procedure or best practice checklist. The IT department must keep track of all assets under management, and user accounts are a type of asset. User accounts are provisioned for new employees and temporary access, such as by consultants and contractors. Some businesses may also need to set up customer accounts.

Provisioning a user account involves the following general steps:

Identity Proofing - verifies that the person is who they say they are by checking official documents and records. Circumstances might also demand a background check, which verifies current and previous addresses, education, or previous employment and whether the person has a criminal record or credit issues.
Issuing Credentials - allows the user to select a password known only to them and/or enroll them with biometric or token-based authenticators.
Issuing Hardware and Software Assets - the user will typically need a computer or smartphone and possibly local copies of licensed software apps. Employees need sufficient resources to do their job. If their resources are inadequate, they might try to obtain hardware and software directly (shadow IT).
Teaching Policy Awareness - by scheduling training and providing access to learning resources so that the employee or contractor is aware of security policies and risks. They must also be aware of policies for the personal use of any IT assets issued to them.
Creating Permissions Assignment - by identifying the work roles that the account must support and configuring the appropriate rights using a role-based, mandatory, or attribute-based access control model. If the account is granted privileged access, it should be tagged for close monitoring.
Deprovisioning is the process of removing the access rights and permissions allocated to an employee when they leave the company or from a contractor when a project finishes. This involves removing the account from any roles or security groups. The account might be disabled for a period and then deleted or deleted immediately.
Data Transfer Security Protocols

The following table describes considerations for securing file transfer using TCP/IP protocols:

Protocol
Description
File Transfer Protocol

(FTP)
Be aware of the following when using FTP:

Anonymous login (also known as blind or anonymous FTP) allows unrestricted access to the FTP server. Disable anonymous login to control access based on username.
The username and password are transferred in cleartext and can be captured in transit by a sniffer. To protect logon credentials, implement a secure protocol, such as Secure Socket Layer (SSL).
Use IPSec or a VPN tunnel to protect data transfers.
The write permission allows users to upload files to the FTP server. Carefully restrict which users have the write permission.
FTP uses port 21 for control information (such as logon) and port 20 for data transfer.
Trivial File Transfer Protocol

(TFTP)
TFTP provides no authentication, encryption, or error detection. In addition, TFTP uses UDP instead of TCP. TFTP might be faster than FTP, but it does not perform error detection which could result in file errors.
Secure Copy Protocol

(SCP)
SCP uses Secure Shell version 1 (SSH1) to secure file transfers and login credentials.
Secure Shell File Transfer Protocol

(SFTP)
SFTP is a file transfer protocol that uses Secure Shell version 2 (SSH2) to secure data transfers. SFTP is not an FTP that uses SSH but rather a secure transfer protocol that is different from FTP.
Secure FTP	Secure FTP (also known as FTP over SSH) tunnels FTP traffic through an SSH tunnel.
FTP Secure

(FTPS)
FTPS adds SSL or Transport Layer Security (TLS) to FTP in order to secure logon credentials and encrypt data transfers. FTPS requires a server certificate.
