Security Pro 8.0

8.8.5 Web Browser Security Facts

This lesson covers the following topics:

Manage browser data
Enhance browser privacy
Manage Browser Data

A web browser is an application for retrieving and displaying information on the internet. Web browsers present the possibility of security breaches in an organization's network. There are general actions and browser-specific actions you can take to help harden the network against attacks from the internet.

When using a browser, the following might indicate an unsecured connection or an attack.

A web document with a URL that contains a new or different domain name than the site you intended to visit.
A menu bar that includes new commands or is missing common commands.
The status line of the browser displays an unlocked symbol when SSL should be in use.
Regardless of the browser you are using, clear your private data regularly. Private data can be cleared based on the data's age. You can clear data from the last few hours, the last few weeks, or all the time. The type of browser you are using, and the types of sites you have visited will determine the type of data that can be cleared. Most browsers let you clear the following data:

Browsing history
Download history
Cookies and other site data
Cached images and files
Passwords
Auto-fill form data
Site permissions
Hosted app data
The following table lists steps for each browser to clear data.

Browser
Steps
Google Chrome	
Steps for the Google Chrome browser are:

Select the ellipses (three dots) button on the menu bar.
Go to History > History.
Select Clear browsing data.
Microsoft Edge	
Steps for the Microsoft Edge browser are:

Select the ellipses (three dots) button on the menu bar.
Go to History.
Select Clear Browsing Data.
Internet Explorer	
Steps for the Internet Explorer browser are:

Select the Tools (gear) icon from the menu bar.
Select Internet Options.
Go to Browsing history.
Select Delete.
Enhance Browser Privacy

You can use the following browser settings and guidelines to enhance browsing privacy and security. These may be named and implemented differently in different browsers, but the general ideas are the same.

Settings
Description
Cookies	
Cookies are text files that save information about preferences, browser settings, and web page preferences. They identify you (or your browser) to websites. Be aware of the following facts about cookies:

Cookies aren't inherently malicious and are often necessary for e-commerce websites.
The use of cookies can constitute a privacy violation because cookies can retain personal information. A hacker could gain access to this information.
Cookies can be misused by malware to collect and report your web surfing activities.
First-party cookies are cookies used by the site you are visiting.
Third-party cookies are cookies placed by sites linked to the site you are visiting. For example, banner ads on a website might place cookies on the machine to identify ads already seen or ads opened.
Secured environments should restrict the use of cookies on all web browsers and other internet service utilities. Cookies can usually be found in the user profile in the file system.
Cache	A cache is a storage location for information that will be used again, such as images, sounds, web pages, and even usernames and passwords used on websites. In addition to taking up space, data in the cache could be retrieved by someone with access to the computer. To provide some level of protection, you should clear the web browser cache whenever you use a public computer to access the internet, especially when you have accessed sites for retrieving personal data.
Security	
Enable the following options to increase security:

Warn me when sites try to install add-ons.
Block reported attack sites.
Block reported web forgeries.
It is best practice always to enter passwords and not to have the browser remember them.

Do not select the Remember passwords for sites option.
Do not select the Use a master password option. When you select this option, all passwords saved on the system are encrypted. You create a master password that retrieves and unencrypts passwords for individual sites.
Add-ons	
An add-on , also known as a plug-in or browser extension, is a program that adds functionality and features to a web browser, including extra toolbars and interactive web content. Over time, a browser collects add-ons, some of which could have malicious intent. Secure the browser by reviewing add-ons and uninstalling items that are not appropriate for the environment.

Disabling an add-on disables it for the current user. This allows users to enable or disable add-ons based on their own needs.
Deleting an add-on removes it from the system and prevents any user from using it.
General	
General information for web browser security includes:

Use the Always ask me where to save files option to avoid having files downloaded without your knowledge. By using this option, you will always know when a file is being downloaded to the system.
Enable the Block Pop-up windows option.
Turn off Remember search and form history. Data you enter into forms, such as your banking account number, will be stored if this option is on.
Turn off Accept third-party cookies or accept cookies and specify ask me every time so you will know when third-party cookies are created.
