Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


Use a Biometric Scanner 00:00-00:36

In this demonstration, we're going to configure biometric authentication systems for Windows. I'm going to use the biometric scanner that's built into the hardware of this laptop, a fingerprint scanner. In order for a computer to use biometrics to authenticate, software to support the login must be on the system. This system has software to handle our fingerprint reader. Each biometric device will need to be supported on the system you wish to use. Based on the type of device you use, you'll configure the operating system to authenticate using the biometrics it offers—your fingerprint, your face, or something else.

Register Biometrics with a Device 00:36-01:11

Before authenticating with biometrics, you'll need to register with the device. For example, for a fingerprint reader such as the one I'm using, I'll need to register my fingerprint with the device by having it scan the finger a few times. Once registered, that same fingerprint can then be used to authenticate. Authentication happens when the registered biometric, our fingerprint, is compared to the fingerprint that's being scanned on the device. If they match, authentication is granted. Keep in mind that with fingerprints, if your hands are wet or dirty, it will be harder for your biometric system to authenticate you, and your fingerprint will be less likely to match with your previous scan.

Set Up Fingerprint Sign-in 01:11-02:02

Let's demonstrate how to register a fingerprint with this system. I'll search for fingerprint, then click on the Set up fingerprint sign-in option. This opens the Sign-in options Settings page. I'll click on Fingerprint recognition (Windows Hello), then click on Set up.

We're prompted to enter our PIN, a backup authentication method in case the fingerprint isn't available. I've already set up the PIN. But if the PIN hadn't been defined, I would be prompted to configure it. Now, it's asking me to put my finger on the scanner. Then it'll ask me to pick it up and set it down on the reader multiple times while it takes a detailed capture of the fingerprint. This may take a few moments to complete. Now, our configuration is done, and the fingerprint scanner is ready to be used to log on to the system. You also have the option to Add another finger. I only need the one, so that's all I'll add.

Summary 02:02-02:09

And that's all for this demonstration. We talked about how to register your fingerprint with the biometric authentication system.