Security Pro 8.0

4.2.2 Authentication Factors Facts

Assuming that an account has been created securely and the identity of the account holder has been verified, authentication verifies that only the account holder is able to use the account and that the system may only be used by account holders. Authentication technologies allow the use not only of passwords but also of biometric and token factors to better secure accounts. Understanding the strengths and weaknesses of these factors will help you to implement and maintain strong authentication systems.

This lesson covers the following topics:

Authentication design
Multifactor authentication
Authentication factors
Authentication Design

To access resources on a network, you must prove who you are and have the required permissions. This process consists of the following elements:

Identification is the initial process of confirming your identity when you request credentials. It occurs when you enter a user ID to log on. Identity proofing occurs during the identification phase as you prove that you are who you say you are to obtain credentials. Suppose you have been identified previously but cannot provide the assigned authentication credentials (such as a lost password). In that case, identity proofing is called upon again.
Authentication is the verification of the issued identification credentials. It is usually the second step in the identification process. It establishes your identity, ensuring that you are who you say you are.
Identity is as simple as telling someone your name. In the computer world, a username is a form of identification. Identification alone is not very secure because anyone could pretend to be you. To substantiate your identity, you need to provide some verification that you are who you say you are. The following chart provides a few of the basics of identity authentication.

Term
Description
Identity provider (IdP)	An identity provider is an online service that manages identity information for other organizations. The IdP creates records from an organization’s existing data and policies. These records are used to authenticate user requests.
Attributes	Attributes can be your role, position, or current project. This information can be used to determine policy and permission.
Certificates	
Certificates are issued by a certificate authority and verify identity by providing the following:

Public keys
Details on the owner of the certificate
Details on the issuer of the certificate
Tokens	A token is a device or a file used to authenticate. A hardware token, such as a key fob, serves as something you have. A software token (or a soft token) is stored in devices such as laptops, desktops, or mobile phones. These tokens are specific to the device and cannot be altered or duplicated.
SSH keys	A secure shell (SSH) key is an access credential. It operates like usernames and passwords but is mainly used to implement single sign-on and other automated processes.
Authentication is performed when a supplicant or claimant presents credentials to an authentication server. The server compares what was presented to the copy of the credentials it has stored. If they match, the account is authenticated. Authentication design refers to selecting a technology that meets requirements for confidentiality, integrity, and availability:

Confidentiality, in terms of authentication, is critical because if account credentials are leaked, threat actors can impersonate the account holder and act on the system with whatever rights they have.
Integrity means that the authentication mechanism is reliable and not easy for threat actors to bypass or trick with counterfeit credentials.
Availability means that the time taken to authenticate does not impede workflows and is easy enough for users to operate.
Multifactor Authentication

An authentication design that uses only passwords or a single knowledge factor is considered weak. Password secrets are too prone to compromise to be reliable. Other types of authentication factors can be used to supplement or replace password-based logins. A multifactor authentication (MFA) technology combines the use of more than one type of factor.

Multifactor authentication requires a combination of different technologies. For example, requiring a PIN along with a date of birth may be stronger than entering a PIN alone, but it is not multifactor.

You might also see references to two-factor authentication (2FA). This just means that there are precisely two factors involved, such as an ownership-based smart card or biometric identifier with something you know, such as a password or PIN.
Authentication Factors

There are many different technologies for defining credentials. These can be categorized as  factors.
Something You Know Factor

The longest-standing authentication factor is "Something You Know," or a knowledge factor. The typical knowledge factor is the login, composed of a username and a password. This is the weakest type of authentication because both items are something you know, but this is also the most used.

The username is typically not a secret (although it should not be published openly), but the password must be known only to the account holder. Only the passwords or other information associated with the usernames can be used to validate identity. A passphrase is a longer password composed of several words. This has the advantages of being more secure and easier to remember. Composition passwords are created by the system and are usually two or more unrelated words divided by symbols on the keyboard. A final example is cognitive information, such as questions you can only answer, such as your mother's maiden name, the model of your first car, or the city where you were born.

Windows sign-in screen

Screenshot used with permission from Microsoft
Description
A personal identification number (PIN) is also something you know. Originally, PINs were associated with short four- or six-digit numeric sequences used with bank cards. In modern authentication designs, the main characteristic of a PIN is that it is valid for authenticating to a single device only. This type of PIN can use any character and be any length.
Something You Are Factor

Something you are refers to a biometric or inherence factor. A biometric factor uses either physiological identifiers, such as a fingerprint or facial scan, or behavioral identifiers, such as the way someone moves (gait). The identifiers are scanned and recorded as a template. When the user authenticates, another scan is taken and compared to the template. This is one of the more secure forms of authentication and one of the most expensive.
Somewhere You Are Factor

Somewhere you are (also known as geolocation) means the system applies a location-based factor to an authentication decision. Location-based authentication measures some statistics about where you are. This could be a physical geographic location measured using a device's location service or Internet Protocol (IP) network address. A device's IP address could be used to refer to a logical network segment, or it could be linked to a geographic location using a geolocation service. Within a premises network, the physical port location, virtual LAN (VLAN), or Wi-Fi network can also be made the basis of location-based authentication.

Location-based authentication is not used as a primary authentication factor, but it may be used as a continuous authentication mechanism or as an access control feature. For example, if a user enters the correct credentials at a remote access gateway, but their IP address shows them to be in a different country than expected, access controls might be applied to restrict the privileges granted or refuse access completely. Another example is when a user appears to log-in from multiple geographic locations that would be physically impossible with travel time.

Examples of implementations include:

A desktop system configured to allow authentication requests only if you have passed through the building's entrance using your ID card. If you are not in the building, your account is locked.
A system configured with an RFID proximity reader and required RFID badges. Authentication requests are allowed if you are within the workstation's RFID range. If you move out of range, the workstation is immediately locked. Reauthentication is not allowed until you move back within range.
GPS location data is used to determine a device's location. Authentication requests are allowed if you and the device are in a specified location. If not, the device is locked, or additional authentication factors are requested.
Wi-Fi triangulation is used to determine a device's location. Authentication requests are allowed if you and the device are in a specified location. If not, the device is locked, or additional authentication factors are requested.
Something You Can Do Factor

Something you can do requires performing a particular action to verify your identity. Here are a few examples of an action that can be used:

Supply a handwritten sample that’s analyzed against a baseline sample for authentication.
Type sample text. Your typing behaviors are analyzed against a baseline before authentication.
Something You Exhibit Factor

Something that you exhibit could include a personality trait or a habit. For example:

The time of day you usually log on.
The method you typically use to access information.
The types of tasks you usually perform.
When administrators notice unusual or risky behavior, they may restrict access. This could mean requiring a password change, another authentication method, or blocking access.
Someone You Know Factor

Having someone who can vouch for you can go a long way in establishing relationships and building trust. The same is valid with authentication. Certificates and attestation are examples of this attribute.
Something You Have Factor

Something you have is an ownership factor. It means that the account holder possesses something that no one else does. The term token-based authentication is often used to describe this factor due to the use of security tokens. Some examples include:

Swipe cards (like credit cards) with authentication information stored on the magnetic strip.
Photo IDs are handy when combined with other forms of authentication. Still, they are high risk if they are the only form of required authentication. Photo IDs are easily manipulated or reproduced, require personnel for verification, and cannot be verified against a system.
Key fobs are small, programmable hardware often used to access buildings and open doors. Key fobs are usually attached to a keychain.
Security tokens generate a unique password when activated manually. These passwords are used once and usually expire in minutes.
Smart cards contain a memory chip with encrypted authentication information.
Smartphone that can generate or receive a cryptographic token.
An ownership factor means that the user possesses some type of device that only they can operate. This is referred to as an authenticator. The authenticator is able to generate or receive a token that identifies and authenticates the user. There are three main types of token generation:

Certificate-based authentication — is when the supplicant controls a private key that can generate a unique signed token. The identity provider can verify the signature via the public key. The main drawback of this approach is the administrative burden of implementing PKI to issue digital certificates.
One-time password (OTP) — is when a token is generated using some sort of hash function on a shared secret value plus a synchronization seed, such as a timestamp (TOTP) or HMAC (HOTP). The token can only be used once. A new token is generated for each authentication decision. This approach still uses a key pair and hashing for security, but it does not require PKI.
Fast IDentity Online (FIDO) Universal 2nd Factor (U2F) — uses a public/private key pair to register each account, avoiding the need to communicate a shared secret, a weakness of HOTP and TOTP. The private key is locked to the U2F device and signs the token; the public key is registered with the authentication server and verifies the token. As no digital certificates are involved, the solution does not rely on PKI.
A hard authentication token is generated within a secure cryptoprocessor. The authentication design means that there is no transmission of the token itself. Several device-based authenticators can be used to implement hard tokens:

oneSmart cards — implement certificate-based authentication. A certificate is a digital document associated with a user as a one-to-one or many-to-one mapping. In a one-to-one mapping, each certificate maps to an individual user account (each user has a unique certificate). With many-to-one mapping, a certificate maps to many user accounts (a group of users shares the same certificate). The smart card stores the user's digital certificate, the private key associated with the certificate, and a personal identification number (PIN) used to activate the card. The card must be presented to a reader. There are physical contact and contactless near-field communication (NFC) card types.
One-time password (OTP) — refers to a cryptoprocessor that can generate a token. This type of hardware token does not need an interface to connect with a computer; the user just reads the code displayed.
Security key — refers to a portable hardware security module (HSM) with a computer interface, such as USB or NFC. They are most closely associated with U2F, but some might also support certificate-based authentication or HOTP/TOTP. A security key must be activated to show presence. Some keys just have an activation button, but most use a biometric fingerprint reader for better security. A PIN must also be configured as a backup mechanism.
Key fob token generator

Image © 123RF.com
Description
There are also simpler smart cards and fobs that simply transmit a static token programmed into the device. For example, many building entry systems work on the basis of static codes. These mechanisms are highly vulnerable to cloning and replay attacks.

A soft authentication token is a one-time password generated by the identity provider and transmitted to the supplicant. The OTP could be sent to a registered phone number as an SMS/text message or to an email account. This method is more likely to use counter-based tokens, though they will still have an expiry period.

Soft tokens sent via SMS or email do not really count as an ownership factor. These systems can be described as two-step verification rather than MFA. The tokens are highly vulnerable to interception.

A more secure soft OTP token can be generated using an authenticator app. This is software installed on a computer or smartphone. The user must register each identity provider with the app, typically using a scannable quick response (QR) code to communicate the shared secret. When prompted to authenticate, the user must unlock the authenticator app with their device credential to view the OTP token. There is less risk of interception than with an SMS or email message, but as it runs on a shared-use device, there is the possibility that malware could compromise the app.

Using an authenticator app to sign in to a site

Description
With token-based MFA, the user account is typically still configured with a password. This might be used as a backup mechanism, or there might be a two-step verification process where the user must enter their password and then submit an OTP.

Passwordless means that the whole authentication system no longer processes knowledge-based factors. The FIDO2 with WebAuthn specifications provides a framework for passwordless authentication. It works as follows:

The user chooses either a roaming authenticator, such as a security key, or a platform authenticator implemented by the device OS, such as Windows Hello or Face ID/Touch ID for macOS and iOS.
The user configures a secure method or local gesture to confirm presence and authenticates the device. This gesture could be a fingerprint, face recognition, or PIN. This credential is only ever validated locally by the authenticator.
The user registers with a web application or service, referred to as a relying party. For each new relying party, the authenticator generates a public/private key pair. The user's client browser obtains the public key from the authenticator and registers it to associate it with an account on the relying party.
When presented with an authentication challenge, the user performs the local gesture to unlock the private key. The private key is used to sign a confirmation that the local gesture worked, which is then sent to the relying party.
The relying party uses the public key to verify the signature and authenticate the account session.
As with FIDO U2F, this provides similar security to smart card authentication but does not require accounts to have digital certificates and PKI, reducing the management burden. FIDO2 WebAuthn improves on FIDO U2F by adding an application programming interface (API) that allows web applications to work without a password element for authentication. Most FIDO U2F authenticators should also support FIDO2/WebAuthn.

For a passwordless system to be secure, the authenticator must be trusted and resistant to spoofing or cloning attacks. Attestation is a mechanism for an authenticator device, such as a FIDO security key or the TPM in a PC or laptop, to prove that it is a root of trust. Each security key is manufactured with an attestation and model ID. During the registration step, if the relying party requires attestation, the authenticator uses this key to send a report. The relying party can check the attestation report to verify that the authenticator is a known brand and model and supports whatever cryptographic properties the relying party demands.

Note that the attestation key is not unique; if it were unique, it would be easy to identify individuals and be a serious threat to privacy. Instead, it identifies a particular brand and model.
