Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


Authorization 00:00-00:34

In this video, I'll go over authorization. Although you'll probably hear the terms authorization and authentication used interchangeably, they're actually quite different.

First, authentication asks the user who they are and verifies the user's identity so they can access a system. Authorization is what comes after this. It verifies the user's permissions to determine which specific resources the user is allowed access to. Authentication is validated using login credentials, and authorization is validated using an access control list, or ACL.

Access Control Lists 00:34-01:17

An ACL is a list of permissions attached to a resource, such as a file or folder. The ACL lists several entries known as access control entries, which are basically users or groups that have access to the resource. Groups allow for efficient administration and make security implementation easier.

A New Technology File System access control list, or NTFS ACL, contains a DACL and an SACL. These are two distinct ACLs types. The D in DACL stands for Discretionary, and the S in SACL stands for System. So Discretionary ACLs specify permissions, and System ACLs are used to keep track of who's accessing a resource and making changes to it.

Rights and Privileges 01:17-03:04

Another Microsoft term is security principals. Security principals include user accounts, computer accounts, and security group accounts. Each security principal has a unique Security ID called an SID. The system keeps track of all SIDs so that when a user logs onto a Microsoft system, the system creates an access token for him or her.

The access token includes the user account's SID, the SIDs of all security groups the user belongs to, and a list of the user's rights or privileges. User rights are rights that specific users have on the system. These are also known as privileges, and they're defined by the Local Security Policy or through the Microsoft Group Policy. When a user tries to access a resource, such as a shared folder, the user's access token with its SID is compared against the SIDs of the shared folder. If there's a match, the user can gain access to the resource.

For example, let's say that Frank attempts to access the Sales folder. When he does, the system reads the folder's ACL, which contains all users' and groups' SIDs that allow file access. When we look at the ACL here, we see that SID 5 has Read access, SID 7 has Read & write access, and SID 12 has Full control. This means that it's probably an administrator account. When we look at Frank's access token, we see that he has a user SID of 3, and that he's also been assigned to Group1, which has an SID of 7. So when the system compares his token with this folder's ACL, there's one match. Frank has access to the Sales folder because he's a member of Group1. No other SIDs match up, so Frank is only granted Read & write file access. This is a simple example, but you get the idea.

NTFS permissions get a lot more complicated than this. But in essence, they're just a way to allow users access to certain Microsoft system resources.

Summary 03:04-03:18

That's it for this lesson. In this lesson, we discussed authorization. While we mainly focused on Microsoft NTFS systems, most of the terms we used are generic. Access control lists are widely used for assigning user permissions and privileges.