Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


Use Group Policy 00:00-00:14

In this demonstration, we're going to spend some time working with Group Policy. Group Policy contains a myriad of settings that you can use to control the way Windows looks, runs, and behaves.

Group Policy Setting Types 00:14-00:29

Understand that there are two different sets of Group Policy settings for Windows. If your Windows system isn't a part of a domain, the locally stored Group Policy settings are applied. But if your system is a member of a domain, you can also apply Group Policy settings from a domain controller.

Local Group Policy Settings 00:29-03:11

Let's begin by looking at the first option. To start, I'm going to come down here and click on Search. Then I'm going to type in gpedit.msc and press Enter to run the Group Policy Editor.

You'll notice up in the window's title bar that it says Local Group Policy Editor. That word Local is key. This tells me that the settings I'm configuring are just for this computer system. You'll also notice that there are two kinds of settings. We have Computer Configuration, and we have User Configuration.

A Computer Configuration Group Policy is applied when the system first boots up, and it's applied to every single user who logs in. The User Configuration settings are different. They're applied on a per-user basis, and they're applied only when the user logs in.

Let's take a look at some sample Computer Configuration settings. We'll go to Administrative Templates > Windows Components and then to Store. Within the Store set of Group Policy settings, you can see each individual setting here.

For example, there's one here that turns off the Store Application. I'll double-click it. When I do, I can look down here in Help, and it tells me what this setting does. Basically, this either allows or denies access to the Windows Store application. If this system is being used in a company environment, you might not want your users going out and downloading whichever apps they want from the Windows Store. In this situation, you could turn Store access off by clicking Enabled and OK.

Now the policy is enabled, but my Store icon is still available on the taskbar. I could still go out to the Windows Store because this change won't be applied until the system shuts down and reboots again. That's because it's a computer policy. Okay, let's go ahead and close this.

Now let's go down here under User Configuration and expand Administrative Templates. Then let's click Control Panel. There are many different Group Policy settings we can configure here that affect the way the user interacts with Control Panel.

Remember that the user settings aren't applied until the user actually logs in. For example, we could come over here and say, "You know what, I don't want my users having any access to Control Panel or to my Settings app." Your average user could really mess things up if they don't know what they're doing.

So what we want to do is go in and turn access completely off. We're going to enable this policy. It tells us down here that, once enabled, if a user tries to select a Control Panel item, a message will appear explaining that this action isn't allowed. The next time somebody logs in to this system, they'll no longer have access to Control Panel.

So that's one way that you can apply Group Policy settings—with the Local Group Policy Editor. This works fine if you're on a network of three, four, or five Windows systems. But you'd still have to go from system to system to make all the changes. If you're in a big network with thousands of computers, this isn't a good way to do things.

Domain Group Policy Settings 03:11-05:59

A better way is to configure your Group Policy settings on a domain controller. Using a domain controller, you can make configuration changes like we just did here, but all at once for everyone. They'll automatically be pushed down to each individual Windows system that's a member of the domain. We can't make those changes here from a workstation, though. Instead, we have to switch over and go to the domain controller server itself. Let's do that.

Alright, I'm at my DC1 domain controller. I can come over here to Tools and click Group Policy Management. When I do, I can browse down through my domain to the Group Policy Object that I want to manage. I right-click and click Edit. This is the Default Domain Policy. It's configured by default as soon as I set up Active Directory, and it'll be applied by default to all Windows systems that are members of the domain unless I tell it not to.

You'll notice that Domain Group Policy is divided up basically the same way as the Local Group Policy. You have your Computer Policies and your User Policies. It works in the exact same way, too—Computer Policies are applied as soon as the system comes online, and User Policies are applied when the user logs in.

Again, the nice thing is that the changes I make on the domain controller will be applied to all the Windows systems that are members of that domain. For example, let's go into my Computer Configuration > Windows Settings > Security Settings > Account Policies and then to Account Lockout Policy.

The Account Lockout Policy is used to prevent an attacker from trying to guess passwords on the system. It does this by saying, "You know what, you're allowed to enter the wrong password a limited number of times. Once you exceed that number, I'm going to lock the system because the authorized user is probably not going to take that many attempts to log in to their own system."

And let's come down here to Account lockout threshold. You'll notice that by default, Account Lockout Policy is disabled. You can try as many passwords as you want, and the system won't lock you out. That's not a good thing. It allows an attacker to just sit there at the console and try password after password until they get the right one.

So let's say that if you can't get the right password after three attempts, we're going to assume that you're not the right person and lock the system. Click OK. When I do, it says, "You know what, if we're going to do that, we need to change the values of these other Group Policy settings as well." These are things like how long we're going to keep the system locked and how long we're going to wait before we reset the counter that's recording the number of invalid login attempts.

So now I'm going to give the user 3 chances to log in, and it's going to stay locked for 30 minutes. After 30 minutes, we'll reset the lockout counter. And because it's a Computer Configuration, the next time each domain system powers on and connects, the setting will be automatically pushed down to them. I don't have to walk around from system to system. Making changes just once is really convenient.

Summary 05:59-06:04

Okay, that's it for this demonstration. In this demo, we configured Group Policy settings.