Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


Group Policy 00:00-00:37

One of the great benefits of managing your networks with a domain is that a domain lets you apply various configuration settings such as security settings globally. You can use a Group Policy to configure settings across multiple Windows hosts in a domain.

In this lesson, we're going to spend some time looking at what Microsoft's Group Policy is and how it works.

Let's first explain just what a policy is.

A policy is a set of configuration settings that can be used to control the working environment of user accounts and computer accounts.

These settings can be applied in one of two ways.

Local Group Polices 00:37-01:00

First, an administrator could go to each computer and configure user and computer policies manually using the Local Group Policy Editor.

The disadvantage of using this method is that it takes a lot of time going from computer to computer and increases the possibility of user error.

Because of this, this method is typically only used for small networks that don't use Active Directory, or AD.

Group Policy Management 01:00-03:32

The better method for you to apply Group Polices is to configure and apply them using Active Directory's Group Policy Management.

Using this method, you're able to push down the needed configuration settings to the individual hosts within the domain straight from the domain controller.

As you can imagine, making the change once to a domain controller is a lot easier than going from computer to computer creating the same setting over and over.

It also means that you're less likely to make a mistake.

It's important to keep in mind that it's possible to use both local and domain policies at the same time.

But, if there's a conflict between the two, the domain policy will always take precedence over any local settings.

When using Group Policy, policies are grouped together in a collection and stored in a Group Policy object, or GPO.

Because GPOs contain a collection of settings, they're very powerful and you can use them to apply a number of things. For example: registry settings, running scripts, applying templates, setting up software, making configuration settings, and more.

Here you see we're editing the GPO named Default Domain Policy, and notice that within this policy in the left panel we have a tree structure, in which we've stored our Group Policy settings.

In this example, if extend our tree out to the bottom, we go from: Computer Configuration to Policies; then to Windows Settings, to Security Settings, to Account Policies; and within Account Policies, we have a group of policies that are related to passwords.

If we click here within Password Policies, we have the group of policies as shown.

Notice that with these policies we can enforce such things as the password history.

Each policy will include some settings, and those can be seen here.

Double-clicking on one of these policies lets you configure these settings.

In the example seen here, Enforce password history is enabled and 24 passwords will be remembered. This means that the end user must use 24 unique passwords before they'll be allowed to reuse a password that they've used before.

As another example, you'll notice we also have a policy for setting the maximum password age. In other words, how many days the user can use the same password before they'll be forced to change it.

Right now, that's set to 42 days.

We also have additional policies to determine the password age, the password length, and whether passwords must comply with our complexity requirements.

As you can see, each of these individual policies lets us customize exactly how we want to manage our passwords.

Computer Configuration Policies 03:32-04:41

Policies within a Group Policy object, such as the Default Domain Policy shown here, are divided into two different categories Computer Configuration and User Configuration.

You might be asking what the difference is between a Computer Configuration Policy and a User Configuration Policy.

A Computer Configuration Policy is applied to the computer itself. Those settings will be applied no matter who logs on to the computer. In other words, Group Policy doesn't care who the individual user is only which computer they're using.

The types of computer policies you may see under Computer Configuration include such things as: policies to control what software should be installed on the computer; scripts that might need to be run when the system boots or shuts down; password restrictions that are going to be applied to all the user accounts on the system; and also network security settings or registry settings that are going to be applied to the entire computer.

The important thing to remember about Computer Configuration Policies is that they're applied as the system boots up and initially connects to the domain. The system enforces them before any user logs on.

User Configuration Policy 04:41-05:52

User Configuration Policies, on the other hand, are applied to a specific user. This means that a user's polices will still be applied regardless of which computer they use to log on to the domain.

As such, different policies can be set for different users. For example, you may have one computer system being used by three different users.

Taking advantage of user policies, you can apply different settings based upon the User Configuration Policy that you set up for individual users.

Some sample User Policy settings could include the software that's installed for a specific user, or scripts that run when they log on or log off.

It might also include security settings for your web browser. You could even use it to push down a list of favorites you've already selected for your browser.

You can also use it to push down registry settings that apply just to that individual user.

Just remember that the key difference between User Policies and Computer Policies is the that User Policies are applied on a per-user basis. So, they're not applied until the user logs on.

Computer Configuration Policies, on the other hand, are applied to the entire computer system no matter who logs on. So they're applied when the system initially boots up.

Key Policy Types 05:52-08:14

There are literally hundreds of different configuration settings that can be applied through Group Policy, and we can't possibly cover all of them here. But, there are a few key ones that you should be familiar with.

First, we have Account Policies. We use Account Policies to control such things as password settings, account lock out settings, Kerberos settings, and more.

Next, we have Local Policies/Audit Policy. You use the Audit Policy settings to configure auditing for various events such as log on, account management, or privileged use.

Next, we have Local Policies/User Rights assignment. User Rights determine what actions a given user can perform on a given computer.

We also have Local Policies/Security Policies. Security Policies are used to control such things as allowing a user to install an unsigned driver or requiring control-alt-delete to be pressed in order to log on.

We can also configure Registry Policies. You can use Registry Policies to configure specific registry keys and values. They can also specify whether you can read or even change a specific registry value.

Another set of Group Policies affect the file system. You can use File System Policies to configure file and folder permissions that apply to multiple computers.

We also have Software Restriction Policies. You can use Software Restriction Policies to define what software can run on any computer that's joined to the domain. These Software Restriction Policies can be applied to a specific user or they can be applied globally to all users.

Finally, we have administrative templates.

Administrative templates are registry-based settings that you can configure within a Group Policy object. They're very useful. You can forgo editing the registry or making configuration changes in Control Panel or the Settings app individually on every single computer in your network. Instead, just use the settings under administrative templates within Group Policy to control the computer configuration and centrally manage the user experience.

For example, you can use administrative templates to enable and configure various Windows features such as Bitlocker, offline files, or even parental controls.

You can also use administrative templates to do fun things like customize the start menu, customize the task bar, or even set up the desktop environment.

Summary 08:14-08:47

That's it for this lesson.

In this video, we talked about Group Policy management.

We first talked about what Group Policy is and how policies can be used to push down configuration settings to all the computers in your domain.

We talked about the relationship between Group Policy and Local Policy settings that you can configure on individual machines.

We then looked at the difference between Computer Configuration Policies and User Configuration Policies.

And then we ended this lesson by reviewing a list of policies that you should be familiar with in order to effectively manage a domain.