Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


Active Directory Overview 00:00-01:01

In this lesson, we're going to introduce you to the basics of Microsoft's Active Directory service, or AD service. Using Active Directory can be beneficial when managing larger computer environments.

In standalone and workgroup networking models, all computer management takes place on each individual computer. This includes authentication and security.

This means that every computer stores its own authentication independently from any other computer.

Although these models may work well in small environments of 10 to 15 computers, they don't work well in larger environments. This is because duplicate sets of user accounts must be created and maintained on each computer.

To overcome these types of challenges, Microsoft created Active Directory services.

AD is a centralized database that provides three major benefits: centralized resources and security administration,

single logon for access to global resources, and simplified resource location.

Centralized Resources and Security Administration 01:01-01:27

Let's first discuss centralized resources and security administration.

This means that an administrator can manage and secure their network resources and security objects from a single point. That single point is the Active Directory database.

This means that—unlike the workgroup networking model—they don't have to go from computer to computer to implement these features.

This feature is probably the most compelling reason for using Active Directory.

Single Logon 01:27-02:46

The second benefit is that you can provide access to the network resources on any server in the domain with a single logon.

So once a user has been created on a domain controller, that user can be granted access to any resource in the network—from any network computer.

For example, if this computer is this user's main desktop computer, he or she could authenticate or log in to this computer daily. He or she would never have to worry about restricted access.

However, if the user needed this computer to attend a meeting in a conference room, they could also login or authenticate from it. They would still have access to the same resources they had when logged in from the main computer.

The third benefit is the ability to simplify access to files and print resources.

This is done by allowing files and print resources to be published on the network. Once done, a user can search the Active Directory database for the desired resource and then securely access it.

For example, if our user authenticated the domain from this computer but wanted to access a shared folder located on this computer, they wouldn't need to directly reauthenticate to that computer.

Instead, they could simply access the folder for which they had been granted rights.

Likewise, if our user needed to print files, they could find and print to the network printer without needing to reauthenticate to the printer.

Active Directory Domains 02:46-03:40

As you can imagine, it's going to take a little more work to implement these features than would be required to manage a workgroup network.

As such, you need to be familiar with the various components that comprise an Active Directory implementation.

Let's look at what they are.

The first thing we need to look at is the concept of a domain.

A domain is an administratively defined collection of network objects or resources that share a common directory database and security policies.

The domain is the basic administrative unit of Active Directory. It's the Active Directory database.

As such, it stores our user information and our security information.

For example, in this network, you can see we're working with the CorpNet.xyz domain.

Notice that the domain is identified using a distinguished Domain Name System name, or DNS name, of CorpNet.xyz.

But sometimes we refer to a domain by just its domain or common name. In this case it's CorpNet.

Domain Controllers 03:40-04:36

Another component of Active Directory is the domain controller.

A domain controller, also called a DC, is a Windows server that holds a copy of the Active Directory database.

A single domain can have multiple domain controllers, with each domain controller containing a copy of the AD database.

In addition, any changes that need to be made to the Active Directory database can be made to any of the domain controllers. Then that change will be sent out to all the other domain controllers within the domain.

This process is called replication.

For example, if I create a new user account on this domain controller— through the process of replication—that same user account would be copied or replicated to the Active Directory databases on all the other domain controllers in the domain.

This allows Active Directory to maintain consistency between all the domain controllers. No matter which one you're working with, it's going to have the exact same information as all the other ones in that domain.

Organizational Units 04:36-06:04

Next, we need to look at organizational units, or OUs.

An OU is like a folder that's used to subdivide and organize resources within the domain.

Examples of organizational units are shown here. We have Marketing, Sales, and Research.

An organizational unit is also known as a container object.

This means that it can contain other domain objects and can even contain other organizational units. Take advantage of this if you want to nest multiple OUs within a given organization unit.

For example, when I expand the Sales OU, you see that I've used several OUs to organize my sales team by region.

OUs can also contain other types of objects, such as user objects, computer objects, and so on.

Besides logically organizing your network resources, OUs also help you simplify your security administration.

For example, if all my users in the Research Department need a similar level of access to network resources, then I can apply the necessary security policies only to the Research OU. Every user will receive those same policies.

This eliminates the need to go through each Research OU user and make the same security changes over and over.

It also means that if I add a new user to this OU, that user will automatically receive the same security privileges. They don't need me to manually assign them anything.

Likewise, if I were to delete a user from the Research OU, that user would lose whatever security privileges they received in the first place.

Built-In Containers 06:04-07:01

Active Directory also includes a special type of container object called a built-in container.

A built-in container looks like an organizational unit, but it's not.

Some of the built-in containers shown here include Foreign Security Principles, Managed Service Accounts, and Users.

Notice that the icons we use for built-in containers are slightly different than those used for the OUs we looked at just a minute ago.

Like the other type of organizational units, built-in containers can contain other objects and can be used to organize our Active Directory objects.

But, these built-in containers are created by default when the domain is initially installed. They're different from organizational units in several key ways.

For example, you can't create, move, rename, or even delete a built-in container.

In addition, they have very few properties that can be edited. There's also not much I can configure with one of these.

With organizational units, on the other hand, there's much more that can be configured.

Active Directory Objects 07:01-07:29

In addition to organizational units and built-in containers, Active Directory also includes objects.

With Active Directory, each network resource is identified as an object.

For example, in the Research OU, you see I have four objects. Three user objects—Pascal, Paul, and Sailor—and a group object named USA.

And there are many other object types used within Active Directory as well.

You can have objects for computers, for printers, and more.

Object Attributes 07:29-07:59

Each of these objects contains attributes. Each attribute represents some bit of information about that object.

Let's suppose that we're viewing the attributes of the Sailor Olsen user object.

Some of the attributes associated with a user object are the user's name, phone number, email address, and so on.

These attributes are used for both locating and securing network resources.

Essentially, if you want someone to be able to log in to the domain and access the network resources, then you must create a user object for them within the domain.

Summary 07:59-08:17

That's it for this lesson.

In this video, we introduced you to Active Directory.

We first talked about Active Directory domains.

We talked about domain controllers.

We talked about organizational units.

We talked about built-in containers.

Then we talked about individual objects in Active Directory.