Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


Hardening Authentication 00:00-00:17

In this lesson, we're going to talk about hardening authentication. Hardening means strengthening. You want to make sure your authentication methods are strong so you can be confident that the users accessing your network are who they claim to be.

Education 00:17-01:09

As simple as it may sound, user education is one of the most important parts of authentication hardening. A surprisingly large percentage of security issues within an organization can be tracked back to an employee or another authorized user. While some of these breaches are intentional, many are unintentional; they're a result of a seemingly harmless action.

After all, the strongest doors and the toughest locks become inconsequential if an employee inadvertently opens the door for a potential attacker because they're trying to be helpful.

End user security training should be extensive. For the purpose of authentication hardening, encourage your employees to use password creation methods that they'll remember. Remind them that they shouldn't write down their passwords. Teach them how to recognize social engineering attempts, and remind them not to share their physical or digital access with anyone for any reason.

Passwords 01:09-02:24

Next, let's look at passwords more closely. Since passwords are a primary method of authorization, be sure to harden your password policies.

For example, configuring password aging policies causes passwords to be valid for only a specified length of time. After this time has passed, the user will need to change their password.

Enforcing password history prevents the end user from being able to reuse the same password over and over. This can be set for a certain number of times. You might configure your settings so employees can't reuse any of their past five passwords. Or you could set up an indefinite policy so that a user can never use any of the same passwords they've used in the past.

Another way to harden passwords is to enforce password complexity. Doing this prevents users from creating simple passwords like "1234" or "password." When you configure your enforcement policy, you can require capital letters, numbers, or special characters. You can even require that the password be a minimum number of characters long.

You can also allow end users to manage their own passwords without requiring help from the system administrator. This is known as self-service password management. While this can be a convenient option for the user and the administrator, be sure to consider whether it's suitable for your desired level of security.

Multifactor Authentication 02:24-03:39

As we've already discussed, passwords are a common authentication method, and they do provide a layer of security. But just because your network or data is protected by a passwords doesn't mean it's secure.

Whenever possible, you should use multifactor authentication. This means using more than one method to authenticate your users.

End users can authenticate in many ways.

The user could provide something they know, like a password or a PIN.

They could provide something they have, like an ID card or a security token. They could provide something that they are by using their biometric data, such as a palm print, a fingerprint, or a retina scan. Robust authentication processes use two or more of these factors.

Some administrators mistakenly assume that requiring users to supply a username and a password constitutes multifactor authentication. That's incorrect. A username and a password are both items that the end user knows, so they constitute single-factor authentication. If you want to make your authentication process more robust, you can add an additional authentication factor.

For example, you could require a name and password along with a smart card: something that the user knows and something that the user has.

Or you could require a fingerprint scan and a PIN: something that the user is and something that the user knows.

Account Restrictions 03:39-04:33

Another way to harden your authentication is to apply restrictions to user accounts. First, you can limit the number of concurrent logins to one per person. This way, if someone forgets to log off of a device, they can't log into a second device without terminating the first connection.

You can also limit when an end user can log in to the system. For example, you may specify that end users can log in between the hours of seven in the morning and six at night. If they try to log in outside of that window, they're blocked.

Another thing you can do is set an account lockout threshold. The account lockout threshold determines the number of failed login attempts that can occur before the user account is locked. Or you could configure a reset lockout counter. The reset lockout counter parameter specifies the amount of time that must pass after a failed login attempt before the failed login counter is reset. This is to slow down password guessing as well as dictionary or brute force attacks.

Account Monitoring 04:33-05:11

While we're on the topic of user accounts, let's discuss monitoring and maintenance. Most network administrators are sitting on a pile of data about their users.

There are logs to show when users are signing in, when they're entering incorrect passwords, when they're resetting passwords, where they log in from, and more.

Keeping an eye on activity logs can be kind of dull and time-consuming. So instead of doing it manually, a lot of people use software to do it for them. If unusual or risky behavior is detected, the software will notify you so can act accordingly. This could mean requiring an additional method of authentication, or it could mean locking an account completely.

Account Maintenance 05:11-06:45

Maintaining accounts is also important. Some large corporation networks have been breached using outdated or inactive user accounts.

If an employee leaves the organization, that user's account needs to be disabled or deleted. You should also disable inactive accounts. These are commonly associated with contract employees, who only access the network periodically. If the user doesn't need access for a time, disable their account. When the user needs access again, you can re-enable it.

Automatic account expiration is another option where the account is only enabled for a certain amount of time. After that time has passed, the account is automatically disabled. This is especially useful for temporary employees.

You should also make sure that the user accounts have the appropriate level of access. On a Windows network, there are two separate sets of user accounts that you must manage. The first set of accounts resides on the domain controller, and they're managed by the admins.

The second type of accounts are the local user accounts on each individual workstation. These are local accounts. You may not want users to have local administrative access. If they do, they could adjust local file system permissions, install malware, or even create a backdoor user account. Because of this the default administrator account should be the only administrator-level local user accounts on your workstation, and you may want to rename it to obscure it. All other users should be standard users that aren't members of the Administrators group.

You should also disable the local guest user account on each workstation. This account allows someone to authenticate and gain limited access to the system without providing any type of credentials.

Limit Remote Access 06:45-07:40

Now, let's talk about remote access. The most important thing you can do to harden your remote access is to ensure that it's only enabled for end users who actually need it. Remote-access clients should connect to the internal network through a demilitarize zone, or DMZ. This allows traffic monitoring, which lets you verify that remote access connections are authorized and legitimate. You can also restrict remote access to only certain authorized IP addresses.

In addition, you can limit concurrent logins, such as only one per user. Every time a remote user connects, their last login date and time should be displayed. This allows the end user to see if somebody else has been using their connection to gain access to the network.

Lastly, you should audit remote logins. Check to see if remote connections are made at suspicious times or from suspicious IP addresses, and check for a spike in the number of failed logins. All these events indicate that some type of attack is probably being conducted.

Summary 07:40-07:55

And that's it for this lesson. In this video, we discussed hardening authentication through user education, stronger passwords, multifactor authentication, account restrictions, account monitoring, account maintenance, and limited remote access.