Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


Account Policies and UAC Settings 00:00-00:40

In this demonstration, we'll show you actions you can take to harden Windows authentication. First, we'll configure account policies that will be applied to all the users in the domain.

Then, we'll enforce UAC settings. An easy way to enforce UAC settings is to make the configuration changes to a GPO in the domain. When you use a GPO, settings are automatically enforced on each workstation whenever a user logs in to the domain.

Using Group Policy, you make the changes once, instead of having to do it manually on each workstation.

Password Policies 00:40-01:16

Let's go to Tools > Group Policy Management and right-click Default Domain Policy. Click Edit. That opens the Group Policy Management Editor. Then, let's go to Computer Configuration > Policies > Window Settings > Security Settings > Account Policies > Password Policy.

Here, you see the password policies that are available.

Minimum Password Length 01:16-01:44

First, let's change the minimum password length from seven characters to a more secure 10 characters.

The value you choose for many of these settings depends on your environment, the organization, and how you want to balance security with ease of use for the users.

If you set the password policy too high, it might be difficult for users to manage. We'll set the password length at 10 because that's a reasonable number of characters for a password.

Password History 01:44-02:07

Now, let's go to Enforce Password History. The value is set to 24. This means the system keeps a 24-password history. That prevents users from repeating recent passwords.

This policy makes sure that users can't reuse a password until they have made 24 different password changes. Click OK. That's fine where it's set.

Maximum Password Age 02:07-02:42

Let's change our maximum password age. We're going to change that to 30 days.

A minimum password age of one day means the user could change the password every day. Some users might try changing the password every day, so they get back to an old password after 24 days of passwords changes. We don't want to allow that.

Let's change the minimum password age to 10 days. That means users have to keep a password for 10 days.

Password Complexity 02:42-03:03

Now, let's look at password complexity requirements. These are basic complexity requirements that Windows has defined.

In most cases when you click the Explain tab, it'll provide more information about the policy setting. Here you can see all the password requirements that Windows has set. So, we'll click OK.

Account Lockout Policies 03:03-03:49

After configuring password policies, let's configure the account lockout policies. If we go here, the first one we'll look at is the account lockout threshold.

You can see that it's currently set to 0 invalid logon attempts. Let's double-click it. Zero invalid logon attempts mean it's not enabled. It's defined, but a policy set at zero is, by definition, not enabled.

Let's change this to 3. That means, after three invalid password entries, the account will lock. Click OK.

If you look, this automatically sets the other two values for the account lockout policy to 10 minutes each. Let's go into these.

Reset Account Lockout Counter and Account Lockout Duration 03:49-04:09

The Account Lockout duration determines the length of time before a locked account will automatically be unlocked. The Reset Account Lockout Counter determines how long an invalid password attempt will be counted toward the Account Lockout Threshold.

10 minutes is fine for both of these settings, so I'm going to leave them as-is.

User Account Control Settings 04:09-06:53

The next thing we'll look at is the User Account Control. If we go to Local Policies > Security Options, we can look at the UAC settings.

A word of caution – configuring the UAC incorrectly can cause some real problems. It can generate excessive elevation prompts, it can cause applications not to install correctly, and be a source of frustration for your users and your help desk. For this video, we're going to go through each of these settings and configure the group policy according to how the UAC behaves by default.

It's always a good idea to put new settings into a new group policy object. So, let's close this and go back to the Group Policy Management. We'll go into the Group Policy Objects folder and right click, then select New to create a new GPO. We'll call this UAC Settings.

We'll edit this GPO and go to Computer Configuration, Policies, Windows Settings, Security Settings, Local Policies, Security Settings, and scroll down to the bottom.

You can read more about what each of these settings do in the description. Here is how we are going to configure them for this video.

Admin Approval Mode for the Built-in Administrator account will be enabled.

Allow UIAccess applications to prompt for elevation without using the Secure Desktop will be disabled.

Behavior of the elevation prompt for administrators in Admin Approval Mode will be set to "Prompt for consent for non-Windows binaries".

Behavior of the elevation prompt for standard users will be set to "Prompt for credentials on the secure desktop".

Detect application installations and prompt for elevation will be enabled.

Only elevate executables that are signed and validated will be disabled.

Only elevate UIAccess applications that are installed in secure locations will be enabled.

Run all administrators in Admin Approval Mode will be enabled.

Switch to the secure desktop when prompting for elevation will be enabled.

And last, virtualize file and registry write failures to per-user locations will be enabled.

Now that I have the GPO configured the way I want, I just need to apply it to an OU, and all the computers beneath that OU will inherit the settings from it.

Summary 06:53-06:58

That concludes this demo. In this demonstration, we hardened Windows authentication.