Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


Summary 00:00-00:18

In this lesson we're going to talk about remote access. Remote access involves the infrastructure, protocols, and software that allow a host to join a local network from a physically remote location or to establish a session on a host over a network.

Remote Access Architecture 00:18-00:41

Remote access networking means the user's device does not make a direct cable or wireless connection to the network. The connection occurs over or through an intermediate network.

Historically, remote access used analog modems connecting over the telephone system, but these days, most remote access is implemented as a virtual private network , or VPN, running over an ISP's network.

Client-to-Site VPN 00:41-01:50

This client-to-site VPN topology is the "telecommuter" model, allowing homeworkers and employees working in the field to connect to the corporate network. The VPN protocol establishes a secure tunnel to keep the contents private, even when the packets pass over ISPs' routers.

The VPN client host first connects to a VPN gateway using an internet connection. The VPN gateway then authenticates the user and creates a secure encrypted tunnel. The VPN client traffic is routed over the network and can access authorized services.

A VPN can also be deployed in a site-to-site model to connect two or more private networks. While remote access VPN connections are typically initiated by the client, a site-to-site VPN is configured to operate automatically. The gateways exchange security information using whichever protocol the VPN is based on. This establishes a trust relationship between the gateways and sets up a secure connection through which to tunnel data. Hosts at each site do not need to be configured with any information about the VPN. The routing infrastructure at each site determines whether to deliver traffic locally or send it over the VPN tunnel.

Remote Desktop 01:50-03:05

Remote desktop refers to a technology that allows users to access and control a computer or device remotely. It enables individuals to connect to another computer over a network, typically the internet, and operate it as if they were physically in front of it.

With a remote desktop, you can access files, programs, and resources on a remote computer without having to be physically present at that location. This technology benefits remote work, technical support, collaboration, and access to personal or work-related resources from anywhere.

A remote access VPN joins the user's PC or smartphone to a remote private network via a secure tunnel over a public network. Remote access can also be a means of connecting to a specific computer over a network. This type of remote access involves connecting to a terminal server on a host using software that transfers shell data only. The connection could be a client and terminal server on the same local network or across remote networks.

A graphical remote access tool sends screen and audio data from the remote host to the client. It transfers mouse and keyboard input from the client to the remote host. Microsoft's Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) can access a physical machine on a one-to-one basis.

Summary 03:05-03:16

That's it for this lesson. In this lesson, we discussed remote access architecture and remote desktop and how they help widen the geographical reach of an individual or an organization without the need for travel.