Control Categories and Types 00:00-00:19

In this video, I'll discuss security control categories and types. As a security professional, your job is to protect the company's assets and business. This means that you're there to prevent hazardous events or to minimize their damage.

Managerial 00:19-00:41

Let's get started.

Managerial controls consist of management techniques and administrative procedures. These can include security policies, hiring policies, disaster recovery plans, or DPRs, and business continuity plans, or BCPs. You should always include written plans for how and when to escalate events and when you need to consult outside help.

Operational 00:41-00:52

Operational controls are ones that the security team performs everyday. These might include reviewing network monitoring data, ensuring that security cameras are working, and requiring visitors to sign in.

Technical 00:52-01:07

Technical controls are based around software, applications, and security appliances. These controls vary greatly by company. Some examples you might see in your line of work are IDSs, IPSs, access control apps, and ASAs.

We use preventative controls for security breaches, but you might see these tools used with other control types as well.

Preventative 01:07-01:42

The easiest preventative control is an Advance Network Appliance, which is sometimes also called an Adaptive Security Appliance, or ASA. This is basically a firewall and router combination that's capable of hosting IDSs and IPSs. A less expensive preventative control is a simple updated antivirus, considering that these have improved drastically over the years. Office access control is also an excellent preventative control, especially if you're using biometrics.

Detective 01:42-01:59

Detective controls inform the security team of an event that's occurring or provide them with logs and artifacts to them help investigate the event further. Examples would be network monitoring applications, log collectors, real-time monitoring alerts, and intrusion detection systems, or IDSs.

Corrective 01:59-02:26

Corrective controls are those that attempt to fix any damage caused by an event. These tools work during and after the course of the event. Think of this as a form of risk mitigation. For example, an intrusion prevention system, or IPS, is designed to intercept packets that are potentially malicious and either drop or isolate them. Another example is endpoint protection, which works to stop malicious data by looking at its signature or behavior.

The deterrent control type discourages malicious actors from trying to breach a network.

Deterrent 02:26-02:53

The more deterrents you have, the less likely it is that anyone will try. These could include internal security

policies, access-protected doors for a server room, entry-point access restriction, biometric sensors, man traps, security cameras, security training, and security guards. Remember, the stronger the deterrents, the less likely it is that a breach occurs.

Physical deterrents keep unauthorized people from physically accessing a company's assets.

Physical 02:53-03:58

So locked doors, proximity cards, fences, cameras, and guards are all ways to physically protect your network. Motion detectors for after-hours monitoring is another example.

Please note that device management is often overlooked by companies. With the prevalence of mobile devices, your company should be able to remotely wipe any devices that are lost or stolen. Let's look at some scenarios.

Let's say that a biometric thumbprint scanner has been installed in the lobby of your building. It requires everyone to scan their thumb to gain access. A malicious actor tries to enter, but their print doesn't match. An access-denied alert is flashed on the screen, and the IT team is fully aware of what's happening. Usually, the imposter doesn't stay around to be questioned!

Another common ploy is for an imposter to try and take advantage of a person's kindness. In this case, an imposter tries to gain entrance from a legitimate employee's proximity badge by claiming to have forgotten theirs. Hopefully, the employee remembers their security training and politely tells the imposter, "No."

That's it for this lesson.

Summary 03:58-04:18

In this lesson, we learned about control categories as well as control types. Categories include managerial, operational, and technical. The security control types we learned about are preventative, corrective, deterrent, and physical. You should use all of these tools together to help you create a secure network.