Security Pro 8.0

5.2.5 Security Zone Facts

This lesson covers the following topics:

Security zones
Security zone networks
Common security zones
Security Zones

Security zones are portions of the network or system that have specific security concerns or requirements. All devices with the same zone have the same security access and security protection needs. These zones are often separated by a traffic control device, such as a firewall or a router, that filters incoming and outbound traffic. For example, you can define a zone that includes all hosts on your private network protected from the internet. You can also define a zone within your network for controlled access to specific servers that hold sensitive information.
Security Zone Networks

The following table lists the types of networks found in your security zones:

Network Type
Description
Wireless	A wirelessly broadcasted network is used on most internal networks so that internal users do not require a physical connection to a router or switch.
Guest	A guest network at an organization often grants internet access only to guest users, but it also has some type of firewall to regulate that access. There could be limited internal resources made available on a guest network. Normally, it is just a way for guests to access the internet without being allowed on the intranet or internal network.
Honeynet	A honeynet is a special network created to trap potential attackers. Honeynets have vulnerabilities that lure attacks so that you can track their actions and protect your real network. Honeynets can generate extremely useful security information.
Ad hoc	An ad hoc network is a decentralized network that allows connections without a traditional base station or router. It allows users to connect two or more devices directly to each other for a specific purpose.
Common Security Zones

The following table lists common zones:

Zone
Description
Screened subnets	
A screened subnet is used as a public-facing accessible network. It acts as a buffer and a barrier to your internal production network, which is accessible from the internet. A screened subnet can be configured using either one or two firewalls and acts as the middleman between the internet and your internal network. For example, a screened subnet is often used to allow employees access to critical network components, such as email servers, VPN connections, and internal web servers, from outside the company.

Screened subnets are also used to provide customer access to a company’s products, such as software. To do this, the firewall allows traffic from the internet into the screened subnet and enables those resources to access resources on the production network. The servers placed in the screened subnet are typically configured as a bastion host.

A bastion host is a server that’s specifically designed and configured to withstand attacks. In general, they are specific-purpose systems that host a single application and are hardened to resist attacks.
Intranet	An intranet is a private network (LAN) that employs internet information services for internal use only. For example, your company network might include web servers and email servers that are used by company employees.
Extranet	An extranet is a privately controlled network distinct from the intranet but located between the internet and a private LAN. An extranet is often used to grant resource access to business partners, suppliers, and even customers outside of the organization.
Wireless	A wireless zone is a broadcasted network connection used within an organization. Users do not need a physical connection to a network port to connect to the intranet or internal resources. Instead, they use a wireless connection on their device to connect to a wireless access point.
