Security Pro 8.0

5.6.2 Network Access Control Facts

This lesson covers the following topics:

NAC overview
Agent vs. agentless configurations
NAC process
NAC Overview

Network access control (NAC) not only authenticates users and devices before allowing them access to the network but also checks and enforces compliance with established security policies. NAC ensures that devices meet a minimum set of security standards before being granted network access by evaluating:

The operating system version
Patch level
Antivirus status
The presence of specific security software
To ensure users and devices can only access the resources necessary to complete their duties, NAC can also restrict access based on:
User profile
Device type
Location
Other attributes
NAC plays a crucial role in identifying and quarantining suspicious or non-compliant devices. For organizations with bring-your-own-device (BYOD) policies and increasing use of IoT devices, NAC helps organizations secure their internal network environment against unauthorized access.

NAC and virtual local area networks (VLANs) work together to improve and automate network security. One of the primary ways NAC integrates with VLAN protections is through dynamic VLAN assignment. Dynamic VLAN assignment is a NAC feature that assigns a VLAN to a device based on the user's identity attributes, device type, device location, or health check results. For instance, a visiting user (such as a vendor) might be placed into a VLAN that only provides internet access, while a corporate user would be assigned to a VLAN with access to internal resources. Additionally, NAC can interact with dynamic VLAN to implement quarantine procedures. If a device is non-compliant with security policies—for example if it lacks updated antivirus software—the NAC system can automatically move it to a quarantine VLAN. This VLAN is generally isolated from the rest of the network, limiting potential damage from threats like malware.

NAC is often integrated with automatic remediation systems, which helps bring a computer into compliance when NAC discovers missing requirements. When such a system is used, a connecting device only has access to resources that can resolve or remediate the issues. After the issues have been remediated, the device is reevaluated and then allowed to access network resources, like the internet or databases.

The NAC process is usually accomplished using a two-stage process of authentication and authorization. If the requirements for either of these stages are not met, the access request is denied. This is often referred to as zero-trust security, meaning nothing is trusted unless it can pass both the authentication and authorization stages.

Authentication defines all the prerequisites a device must meet to access the network. This criteria is detailed for such things as anti-malware, OS, patch level, and so on.
Authorization looks at the authentication information and applies the appropriate policies to provide the device with the access it’s defined to receive.
Agent vs. Agentless Configurations

NAC can enforce security policies using agent-based and agentless methods. In an agent-based approach, a software agent is installed on the devices that connect to the network. This agent communicates with the NAC platform, providing detailed information about the device's status and compliance level. An agent-based NAC implementation can enable features such as automatic remediation, where the NAC agent can perform actions like updating software or disabling specific settings to bring a device into compliance with mandatory security configurations.

In contrast, an agentless NAC approach uses port-based network access control or network scans to evaluate devices. For example, agentless NAC may use DHCP fingerprinting to identify the type and configuration of a device when it connects, or it might perform a network scan to detect open ports or active services. While agentless methods may not provide as detailed information about a device's status, they can be used with any device that connects to the network, including guest or IoT devices, without requiring any prior configuration.

Defining policy violations in PacketFence Open Source NAC

Screenshot used with permission from packetfence.org
Description
An agent can be persistent, in which case it is installed as a software application on the client or nonpersistent. A nonpersistent (or dissolvable) agent is loaded into memory during posture assessment but is not installed on the device.


Screenshot used with permission from packetfence.org
Description
PacketFence supports the use of several scanning techniques, including vulnerability scanners, such as Nessus and OpenVAS, Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) queries, and log parsers. (Screenshot used with permission from packetfence.org)
NAC Process

NAC is a complicated process that requires forethought. Use the following process when implementing NAC:

Plan - A committee should convene and make decisions that define how NAC should work.
Define - The roles, identities, and permissions (policies) must be defined.
Apply - Once defined, the policies must be applied.
Review/Revise - As business needs change, the process must be reviewed to determine whether changes are required.
