Security Pro 8.0

2.1.2 Threat Actor Types Facts

Historically, cybersecurity techniques relied on the identification of static known threats, such as viruses or rootkits, Trojans, botnets, and exploits for specific software vulnerabilities. It is relatively straightforward to identify and scan for these types of threats with automated software. Unfortunately, adversaries were able to develop means of circumventing this type of signature-based scanning.

The sophisticated nature of modern cybersecurity threats requires the creation of profiles of threat actor types and behaviors. This analysis involves identifying the attributes of threat actors' location, capability, resources/funding, and motivation. To evaluate these factors, you must be able to evaluate the sources of threats or threat actors. This topic will help you to classify and evaluate the motivation and capabilities of threat actor types so that you can assess and mitigate risks more effectively.

This lesson covers the following topics:

Attributes of threat actors
Motivations of threat actors
Types of threat actors
Attributes of Threat Actors

Attribute
Description
Internal/external	
Internal/external refers to the degree of access a threat actor possesses before initiating an attack. An external  threat actor has no account or authorized access to the target system. A malicious external threat must infiltrate the security system using unauthorized access, such as breaking into a building or hacking into a network. Note that an external actor may perpetrate an attack remotely or on-premises. It is the threat actor that is external rather than the attack method.

Conversely, an internal/insider threat actor has been granted permissions on the system. This typically means an employee, but insider threats can also arise from contractors and business partners.
Sophistication/capability	The level of sophistication/capability refers to a threat actor's ability to use advanced exploit techniques and tools. The least capable threat actor relies on commodity attack tools that are widely available. More capable actors can fashion new exploits in operating systems, applications software, and embedded control systems. At the highest level, a threat actor might use non-cyber tools such as political or military assets.
Resources/funding	A high level of capability must be supported by  resources/funding. Sophisticated threat actor groups need to be able to acquire resources, such as customized attack tools and skilled strategists, designers, coders, hackers, and social engineers. The most capable threat actor groups receive funding from nation-states and organized crime.
Motivations of Threat Actors

Motivation is the threat actor's reason for perpetrating the attack. A malicious threat actor could be motivated by greed, curiosity, or some grievance, for instance. Threats can be characterized as structured/targeted or unstructured/opportunistic, depending on how widely an attack is perpetrated. For example, a criminal gang attempting to steal customers' financial data from a company's database system is a structured, targeted threat. An unskilled hacker launching some variant of the "I Love You" email worm sent to a stolen mailing list is an unstructured, opportunistic threat.

A threat actor with malicious motivation can be contrasted with an accidental or unintentional threat actor. An unintentional threat actor represents accidents, oversights, and other mistakes. To help analyze motivations, it is first useful to consider the general strategies that a threat actor could use to achieve an objective:

Service disruption — prevents an organization from working as it does normally. This could involve an attack on their website or using malware to block access to servers and employee workstations. Service disruption can be an end in itself if the threat actor's motivation is to sow chaos or gain revenge. Service disruption can be used as a blackmail threat, or it can be used as a tactic in the pursuit of some different strategic objective.
Data exfiltration — transfers a copy of some type of valuable information from a computer or network without authorization. A threat actor might perform this type of theft because they want the data asset for themselves, so they can exploit its loss as blackmail or sell it to a third party.
Disinformation — falsifies some type of trusted resource, such as changing the content of a website, manipulating search engines to inject fake sites, or using bots to post false information to social media sites.
You can relate these strategies to how they affect the CIA triad: data exfiltration compromises confidentiality, disinformation attacks integrity, and service disruption targets availability.
Chaotic Motivations

In the early days of the internet, many service disruptions and disinformation attacks were perpetrated with the simple goal of causing chaos. Hackers might deface websites or release worms that brought corporate networks to a standstill for no other reason than to gain credit for the hack.

This type of vandalism, for its own sake, is less prevalent now. Attackers might use service disruption and disinformation to further political ends, or nation-states might use it to further war aims. Another risk is threat actors motivated by revenge. Revenge attacks might be perpetrated by an employee, former employee, or any external party with a grievance.
Financial Motivations

As hacking and malware became more sophisticated and better commodified, the opportunities to use them for financial gain grew quickly. If an attacker is able to steal data, they might be able to sell it to other parties. Alternatively, they might use an attack to threaten the victim with blackmail or extortion or to perpetrate fraud:

Blackmail is demanding payment to prevent the release of information. A threat actor might have stolen information or created false data that makes it appear as though the target has committed a crime.
Extortion is demanding payment to prevent or halt some type of attack. For example, a threat actor might have used malware to block access to an organization's computers and demand payment to unlock them.
Fraud is falsifying records. Internal fraud might involve tampering with accounts to embezzle funds or inventing customer details to launder money. Criminals might use disinformation to commit fraud, such as posting fake news to affect the share price of a company, promoting pyramid schemes, or creating fake companies.
Political Motivations

A political motivation means that the threat actor uses an attack to bring about some type of change in society or governance. This can cover a very wide range of motivations:

An employee acting as a whistleblower because of some ethical concern about the organization's behavior.
A campaign group disrupting the services of an organization that they believe acts in contradiction to their ethical or philosophical beliefs.
A nation-state using service disruption, data exfiltration, or disinformation against government organizations or companies in another state in pursuit of war aims.
Nation-states commonly perpetrate espionage and disinformation attacks against one another, whether or not they are at war. In cybersecurity, espionage is a type of data exfiltration aimed at learning secrets rather than selling them or using the theft for blackmail.

There is also the threat of commercial espionage, where a company attempts to steal the secrets of a competitor.
Types of Threat Actors

It can also be helpful to evaluate the risk that well-known threat actor types or profiles pose to a business, given awareness of the general strategies and motivations. Note that the detailed process of analyzing the threat posed by a particular actor or adversary group is described as threat modeling.
Hackers

Hacker describes an individual with the skills to gain access to computer systems through unauthorized or unapproved means. Originally, hacker was a neutral term for a user who excelled at computer programming and computer system administration. Hacking into a system was a sign of technical skill and creativity that gradually became associated with illegal or malicious system intrusions. The terms unauthorized (previously known as black hat) and  authorized (previously known as white hat) are used to distinguish these motivations. An authorized hacker always seeks authorization to perform penetration testing of private and proprietary systems.
Unskilled Attackers

An  unskilled attacker is someone who uses hacker tools without necessarily understanding how they work or having the ability to craft new attacks. Unskilled attacks might have no specific target or any reasonable goal other than gaining attention or proving technical abilities.
Hacker Teams and Hacktivists

The historical image of a hacker is that of a loner, acting as an individual with few resources or funding. While the "lone hacker" remains a threat that must be accounted for, threat actors are now likely to work as part of a team or group. The collaborative team effort means that these threat actors are able to develop sophisticated tools and novel strategies.

A hacktivist group, such as Anonymous, WikiLeaks, or LulzSec, uses cyber weapons to promote a political agenda. Hacktivists might attempt to use data exfiltration to obtain and release confidential information to the public domain, perform service disruption attacks, or deface websites to spread disinformation. Political, media, and financial groups and companies are most at risk of becoming a target for hacktivists. Still, environmental and animal advocacy groups may target companies in a wide range of industries.
Nation-State Actors

Most nation-states have developed cybersecurity expertise and will use cyber weapons to achieve military and commercial goals. The security company Mandiant's APT1 report into Chinese cyber espionage units, shaped the language and understanding of cyber-attack lifecycles.

The term  advanced persistent threat (APT) was coined to understand the behavior underpinning modern types of cyber adversaries. Rather than think in terms of systems being infected with a virus or Trojan, an APT refers to the ability of an adversary to achieve an ongoing compromise of network security—to obtain and maintain access—using various tools and techniques.

Nation-state actors have been implicated in many attacks, particularly on energy, health, and electoral systems. The goals of state actors are primarily disinformation and espionage for strategic advantage. Still, it is known for countries—North Korea is a good example—to target companies for financial gain.


Screenshot © 2023 The MITRE Corporation. This work is reproduced and distributed with the permission of The MITRE Corporation.
Description
State actors will work at arm's length from the national government, military, or security service that sponsors and protects them, maintaining "plausible deniability." They are likely to pose as independent groups or even as hacktivists. They may wage false flag disinformation campaigns that try to implicate other states.
Organized Crime and Competitors

In many countries, cybercrime has overtaken physical crime in terms of the number of incidents and losses.  Organized crime can operate across the internet from a different jurisdiction than its victim, increasing the complexity of prosecution. Criminals will seek any opportunity for profit, but typical activities are financial fraud—against individuals and companies—and blackmail/extortion.

Most espionage is thought to be pursued by state actors, but it is not inconceivable that a rogue business might use cyber espionage against its competitors. Such attacks could aim at theft, disrupt a competitor's business, or damage their reputation. Competitor attacks might be facilitated by employees who have recently changed companies and bring insider knowledge with them.
Internal Threat Actors

Many threat actors operate externally from the networks they target. An external actor has to break into the system without having any legitimate permissions. An  internal threat (or insider threat) arises from an actor identified by the organization and granted some type of access. Within this group of internal threats, you can distinguish insiders with permanent privileges, such as employees, from insiders with temporary privileges, such as contractors and guests.

There is the blurred case of former insiders, such as ex-employees now working at another company or who have been dismissed and now harbor a grievance. These can be classified as internal threats or treated as external threats with insider knowledge and possibly some residual permissions if effective offboarding controls are not in place.

The main motivators for a malicious internal threat actor are revenge and financial gain. Like external threats, insider threats can be opportunistic or targeted. An employee who plans and executes a campaign to modify invoices and divert funds is launching a structured attack. An employee who tries to guess the password on the salary database a couple of times, having noticed that the file is available on the network, is perpetrating an opportunistic attack. You must also assess the possibility that an insider threat may be working in collaboration with an external threat actor or group.

A whistleblower is someone with an ethical motivation for releasing confidential information. While this could be classed as an internal threat in some respects, it is important to realize that whistleblowers making protected disclosures—such as reporting financial fraud through an authorized channel—cannot themselves be threatened or labeled in any way that seems retaliatory or punitive.

Insider threats can also arise from unintentional sources.  Unintentional or inadvertent insider threat is often caused by a lack of awareness or carelessness, such as users demonstrating poor password management. Another example of unintentional insider threat is the concept of  shadow IT, where users purchase or introduce computer hardware or software to the workplace without the sanction of the IT department and without going through a procurement and security analysis process. The problem of shadow IT is exacerbated by the proliferation of cloud services and mobile devices, which are easy for users to obtain. Shadow IT creates a new unmonitored attack surface for malicious adversaries to exploit.



Play Video


Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


Identifying Common Threat Actors & Motivations 00:00-06:20

James Stanger

You know, it's always interesting to compare and contrast the threat actors and their motivations and see what's going on there. To tell us more about it, we've brought in Brian Calkin from CyberWA. He is the CTO over there. Brian, how are you doing?

Brian Calkin

I'm doing well James. How are you?

James Stanger

I'm doing great, man. Tell us a bit about yourself and let's start talking about threat actors and what they do.

Brian Calkin

Yeah, sure. So, I've been in the cyber industry now for 20 years. I can't believe it's been that long, but it certainly has been. Various roles in the past. Operational, management, executive. Currently, I'm the Chief Technology Officer at a company called Cyber WA. We do cyber protective services for high network individuals and celebrities.

James Stanger

You know, as you do your work, you clearly have come across quite a few threat actors before. Let's talk about the characteristics of these threat actors. You've got nation states, you've got hacktivists, insider threats. Tell us a bit more about some of these.

Brian Calkin

Yeah, sure. So, when I think of threat actors, I basically put them into one of four different buckets. So, you've mentioned nation states. That's certainly one. Nation states, you can think highly funded, highly skilled, highly organized countries. You know, governments that are out looking to attack other countries and gain intellectual property and information, espionage,

those types of things. Cyber criminals, certainly, as the name would imply, looking to steal money and to get money and to, basically to go make a few dollars out there due to victims. Hacktivists, generally more ideological motivated. You know, they're trying to right some wrong or some perceived injustice that they've come across and they want to make it right. And then, of

course, insider threats. You know, whether it be intentional insiders or, you know, unknowingly people trying to do good out there and inadvertently opening up vulnerabilities into an organization.

James Stanger

Of these different types of threat actors-- we'll stick with the kind of active threat actors-- which ones tend to be better funded or does that even matter?

Brian Calkin

I think it does matter. I think that certainly the best funded threat actor out there is gonna be a nation state threat actor. They, for certain, have the most funding, have the most resources. You know, again, most cases are government funded and so, they've got the government dollars to back them in whatever they need, so they've got the best tools and the sharpest talent as

well and they are very stealthy, very sneak. Cyber criminals are also well funded, because they're in the business of making money, so they're spending money to make money. Activists, maybe not as funded.

James Stanger

Does funding imply sophistication? In other words, are there some folks who aren't particularly well funded but they're really good? Does that happen?

Brian Calkin

Oh, absolutely. I think that there's lots of folks, and threat actors in particular that are very sharp and very skilled, but may not have the funds to go out and spend a lot of money on the best software or systems or those types of things. So, they'll use things that are maybe freely available or even things that are resident on systems themselves, you know, tools and things that

legitimate administrators might use to administer systems, but they might take advantage of in order to do harm instead of good.

James Stanger

And you mention, for example, like, hacktivists and then you've got folks who are organized crime or state level, what are some of the goals of these? Can you match certain goals to certain types of groups in general?

Brian Calkin

Yeah, sure. I think, you know, starting with nation states, their primary goal in many cases, things like, you know, espionage. They want to disrupt critical systems amongst the country. You know, I've even seen cases where there'll be a nation state behind compromising many tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands of systems, to then use them collectively together for an attack,

you know. And I think another one that's been quite popular is them, you know, stealing intellectual property from other nations, in particular, and so the example I use is like a nuclear submarine or a nuclear battleship, for instance. You know, why bother spending your own R&D budget when you can just go and steal somebody else's end result, after they've already spent all the time and energy to do the research.

James Stanger

So, they're not really after revenge usually, or whatever. They're looking for exfiltration, right, to steal data.

Brian Calkin

Yeah, absolutely. They want to take a step ahead and they want to do it in the quickest, most efficient way possible, so what better way than to steal it from somebody else.

James Stanger

Now, earlier you mentioned threat actors, like people meaning to do well. I think you're bringing up the concept of shadow IT. Explain how that works and why it's considered kind of a threat in a way.

Brian Calkin

Sure. Yeah, so shadow IT, the general idea is that, you know, in these jobs that we've all been a part of and folks are applying to, you run into very technical, high skilled people, you know. And so, those people want to do good in the organization and then they oftentimes will, say, take matters into their own hands and so, they might set up a system or a network or, you

know, make a firewall rule change, whatever the case would be, in order to help advance their project, to get the job accomplished. But what they don't realize, and it's not intentional in most cases, is they're inadvertently opening up a hole within the organization and a vulnerability that, you know, had they coordinated with the organization at large, they would have realized. But

because they're just, you know, heads down, focused on trying to get the job done, they just don't see it or they can't see it.

James Stanger

And oftentimes it's not documented, so it's in the shadows. Nobody knows where it is.

Brian Calkin

Exactly. Hence the term, right. So, they're just going off and doing it and, you know, and I've seen that happen before in past, where somebody will have made a change like that, not documented anywhere, and then leave the organization, you know, and maybe move onto another job. And then we come across this thing that someone has done and we say, well who did this?

I didn't do it. Did you do it? And then you have to kind of track down the history of it and find out why things are the way they are.

James Stanger

Brian, thank you so much for talking and comparing common threat actors, their motivations and how those things work. Sure appreciate it, man.

Brian Calkin

Yeah, you're welcome. It's a pleasure. Thanks.


Full Screen
