Security Pro 8.0

2.1.5 Attack and Defense Strategy Overview

Understanding the methodology behind common attacks can help you better defend your assets.

This lesson covers the following topics:

Attack strategies
Defense methodologies
Attack Strategies

General attack strategies incorporate some or all of the techniques explained in the following table.

Strategy
Description
Perform reconnaissance	
Reconnaissance is the process of gathering information about an organization, including:

System hardware information
Network configuration
Individual user information
Use social engineering	
Social engineering is the process of manipulating others into providing sensitive information. Social engineering tactics include:

Intimidation
Sympathy
Use technical approaches	
A technical approach to obtaining information includes using software or utilities to find vulnerabilities in a system. Methods often used by hackers are:

Port scan
Ping sweep
Breach the system	A breach is the penetration of system defenses. It is often achieved by using information gathered through reconnaissance.
Escalate privileges	Escalating privileges is a primary objective of an attacker. Once an attacker has breached the system, obtaining higher privileges allows the attacker to access more information and gain greater control within the system.
Create a backdoor	Creating a backdoor is an alternative method of accessing an application or operating system for troubleshooting. Hackers often create backdoors to exploit a system without being detected.
Stage computers	
Staging a computer involves preparing it to perform additional tasks in the attack, such as installing software designed to attack other systems. This is an optional step.
Exploit vulnerabilities	
An exploitation takes advantage of known vulnerabilities in software and systems. Once a vulnerability has been exploited, an attacker can often:

Steal information
Deny services
Crash systems
Modify/alter information
Defense methodologies

General defense methodologies include the following items:

Methodology
Description
Layering	Layering involves implementing multiple security strategies to protect the same asset. Defense in depth or security in depth is based on the premise that no single layer is completely effective in securing assets. The most secure system/network has many layers of security and eliminates single points of failure.
Principle of least privilege	The principle of least privilege states that users or groups are given only the access they need to do their jobs and nothing more. When assigning privileges, be aware that it is often easier to give a user more access when it is needed than to take away privileges that have already been granted.
Variety	Defensive layers should incorporate a variety of methods. Implementing multiple layers of the same defense does not provide adequate protection against attacks.
Randomness	Randomness in security is the constant change in personal habits and passwords to prevent predictable behavior.
Simplicity	Security measures should provide protection but not be so complex that it is difficult to understand and use.
