Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


Social Engineering Overview 00:00-00:42

A social engineering attack involves human interaction. The attacker tries to trick their victim, convince them to do things, or make them give out information they wouldn't under normal circumstances.

Because this attack involves humans, it's very hard to protect your data and assets against social engineering. It's also much harder to track and catch it before any damage is done. The best way to minimize social engineer's impact is to educate employees, managers, administrators, custodial staff, clients, users, consumers--essentially, the entire planet should learn to recognize and respond appropriately to social engineering attacks.

Manipulation and Motivation 00:42-01:46

Social engineers are master manipulators. They're very good at discerning signs and behaviors worth exploiting for information. Some of the tactics that exploit human weakness include moral obligation, innate human trust, threatening, asking for very little, and using ignorance.

If the attacker exploits the victim's willingness to be helpful and assist them out of a sense of responsibility, that's leveraging moral obligation.

If the attacker exploits the victim's natural tendency to trust others, they're taking advantage of innate human trust. The attacker wears certain clothes, creates a certain demeanor, and speaks words and terms the victim is familiar with so they'll trust the attacker and give them what they want.

A threat is when the attacker intimidates the victim by promising negative consequences if they don't comply with the attacker's request.

And attackers will often promise some reward in return for very little to nothing, asking the victim to do a small favor or share a bit of information in return for a huge payoff.

Ignorance means the victim isn't educated in social engineering tactics and prevention, so they can't recognize an attack even when it's happening to them.

Social Engineering Process 01:46-01:56

Now let's talk about the steps involved in a social engineering attack. These steps can be divided into three main parts: research, development, and exploitation.

Research Phase 01:56-02:18

The research phase is when the attacker starts gathering information about the company or organization they'll attack. Attackers use a process called footprinting to do this.

This is when the attacker goes through the target company's official websites and social media, performs dumpster diving, searches for employees' names, email addresses, and IDs, goes on a company tour, and conducts other types of on-site observation.

Development Phase 02:18-02:56

Then he'll move on to the development phase, which has two parts: selecting individual targets within the company being attacked and forming a relationship with the targets.

Usually, attackers choose people who not only have access to the information or object they desire, but show signs of being frustrated, over-confident, or arrogant, or having other traits that make it easy to extract information from them.

Once he's selected his targets, the attacker will start forming a relationship with them through conversations, emails, shared interests, and so on. This builds the victims' trust in the attacker, allowing them to be comfortable and relaxed so that they'll be even more willing to help.

Exploitation Phase 02:56-03:47

The exploitation phase is when the attacker takes advantage of the relationship with the victim and uses the victim to extract information, obtain access, or accomplish the attacker's purposes in some way. Some examples include disclosing a password and username over the phone; introducing the attacker to other company personnel, providing social proof for the attacker; inserting a USB flash drive with a malicious payload into a company computer; opening an infected email attachment; exposing trade secrets in a discussion with a supposed peer.

If the exploitation is successful, the only thing left to do is wrap things up without raising suspicion. Most attackers tie up loose ends, like erasing digital footprints and ensuring no items or information get left behind. A well-planned and smooth exit strategy is the attacker's goal and their final act in the exploitation phase.

Summary 03:47-04:20

Social engineering is such a prevalent threat because it involves humans. So, let's review the key things to remember about social engineers: skilled attackers will know which human weaknesses to exploit based on people's feelings, emotions, and personalities. They're also detail-oriented, patient observers. They're skilled manipulators and good at forming relationships. The best ones will even clean up their tracks to make sure they won't get caught even if the victim realizes what's happened some time later. And the best defense against social engineers is user education.