Security Pro 8.0

2.2.2 Social Engineering Overview Facts

Social engineering refers to an attacker enticing or manipulating people to perform tasks or relay information. Social engineering tries to get a person to do something the person would not do under normal circumstances.

This lesson covers the following topics:

Social engineering
Manipulation and motivation
Social engineering process
Social Engineering

In this lesson, you will learn to:

Use the Social Engineer Toolkit.
Investigate a social engineering attack.
Identify social engineering.
Learning Outcomes

As you study this lesson, answer the following questions:

What is social engineering?
What are the phases of a social engineering attack?
What is pretexting and how is it used in social engineering?
What are some of the most common social engineering techniques?
How are motivation techniques effective in convincing targets to comply with a hacker's desires?
What are common variations of phishing?
How does a watering hole attack work?
Key Terms

Key terms for this lesson include the following:

Term
Definition
Social engineering	An activity where the goal is to use deception and trickery to convince unsuspecting users to provide sensitive data or to violate security guidelines.
Impersonation	A social engineering attack where an attacker pretends to be someone they are not.
Pretexting	A social engineering tactic where a team communicates, whether directly or indirectly, a lie or half-truth in order to get someone to believe a falsehood.
Phishing	An email-based social engineering attack in which the attacker sends email from a supposedly reputable source, such as a bank, to try to elicit private information from the victim.
Vishing	A human-based attack where the attacker extracts information while speaking over the phone or leveraging IP-based voice messaging services (VoIP).
Smishing	A form of phishing that uses SMS text messages to trick a victim into revealing information.
Pharming	A type of attack that redirects users from a legitimate website to a malicious one.
Typosquatting	An attack in which an attacker registers a domain name with a common misspelling of an existing domain, so that a user who misspells a URL in a browser is taken to the attacker's website.
Business email compromise	An impersonation attack in which the attacker gains control of an employee's account and uses it to convince other employees to perform fraudulent actions.
Watering hole attack	An attack in which an attacker targets specific groups or organizations, discovers which websites they frequent, and injects malicious code into those sites.
Certification Exam Objectives

This lesson helps you prepare for the following certification exam objectives:

Exam
Objective
CompTIA Security+ SY0-701	
2.1 Compare and contrast common threat actors and motivations.

Threat actors
Unskilled attacker
Insider threat
Motivations
2.2 Explain common threat vectors and attack surfaces.

Human vectors/social engineering
Phishing
Smishing
Vishing
Misinformation/disinformation
Impersonation
Business email compromise (BEC)
Pretexting
Watering hole
Brand impersonation
Typosquatting
5.6 Given a scenario, implement security awareness practices.

User guidance and training
Social engineering
Development
TestOut Security Pro	
5.0 Audit and Security Assessment

5.2 Assessment Techniques

5.2.2 Identify Social Engineering
Manipulation and Motivation

Social engineers are master manipulators and use many techniques to motivate their targets to disclose information. The following table provides common examples of these techniques:

Technique
Description
Moral obligation	An attacker uses moral obligation and a sense of responsibility to exploit the target’s willingness to be helpful.
Innate human trust	Attackers often exploit a target’s natural tendency to trust others. The attacker wears the right clothes, has the right demeanor, and speaks words and terms the target is familiar with so that the target will comply with requests out of trust.
Threatening	An attacker may try to intimidate a target with threats to make the target comply with a request. This is especially the case when moral obligation and innate human trust tactics are ineffective.
Offering something for very little to nothing	Offering something for very little to nothing refers to an attacker promising huge rewards if the target is willing to do a very small favor. The small favor can include sharing what the target thinks is a very trivial piece of information for something the attacker offers.
Ignorance	Ignorance means the target is not educated in social engineering tactics and prevention, so the target does not recognize social engineering when it is happening. The attacker knows this and exploits the ignorance.
Authority and fear	Authority techniques rely on power to get a target to comply without questioning the attacker. The attacker pretends to be a superior with enough power that the target will comply right away without question. The attacker could also pretend to be there in the name of or upon the request of a superior. Authority is often combined with fear. If an authority figure threatens a target with being fired or demoted, the target is more likely to comply without a second thought.
Social proof	With a social proof technique, the attacker uses social pressure to convince the target that it is okay to share or do something. In this case, the attacker might say, "If everybody is doing it, then it is okay for you to do it, too."
Scarcity	Scarcity appeals to the target's greed. If something is in short supply and will not be available, the target is more likely to fall for it.
Likeability	Likeability works well because humans tend to do more to please a person they like as opposed to a person they do not like.
Urgency	To create a sense of urgency, an attacker fabricates a scenario of distress to convince an individual that action is immediately necessary.
Common ground and shared interest	Common ground and shared interest work because sharing a hobby, life experience, or problem instantly builds a connection and starts forming trust between two parties.
Social Engineering Process

The social engineering process can be divided into three main phases: research, development, and exploitation. The following table describes each phase.

Phase
Description
Research	In the research phase, the attacker gathers information about the target organization. Attackers use a process called footprinting, which takes advantage of all resources available to gain information. Footprinting includes going through the target organization’s official websites and social media, performing dumpster diving, searching sources for employees’ names, email addresses, and IDs, going through a tour of the organization, and other kinds of onsite observation.
Development	
The development phase involves two parts:

Selecting individual targets within the organization being attacked.
Forming a relationship with the selected targets.
Usually, attackers select people who will not only have access to the desired information or object but also show signs of being frustrated, overconfident, arrogant, or somehow easy to extract information from. Once a target is selected, the attacker will start forming a relationship with the target through conversations, emails, shared interests, etc. The relationship helps build the target's trust in the attacker, allowing the target to be comfortable, relaxed, and more willing to help.
Exploitation	
In the exploitation phase, the attacker takes advantage of the relationship with the target and uses the target to extract information, obtain access, or accomplish the attacker’s purposes in some way. Some examples include:

Disclosing password and username
Introducing the attacker to other personnel, thus providing social credibility for the attacker
Inserting a USB flash drive with a malicious payload into an organization's computer
Opening an infected email attachment
Exposing trade secrets in a discussion.
If the exploitation is successful, the only thing left to do is to wrap things up without raising suspicion. Most attackers tie up loose ends, such as erasing digital footprints and ensuring no items or information are left behind for the target to determine whether an attack has occurred or identify the attacker. A well-planned and smooth exit strategy is the attacker's goal and final act in the exploitation phase.
