Click one of the buttons to take you to that part of the video.


Social Engineering 00:00-00:56

Adversaries can use a diverse range of techniques to compromise a security system. A prerequisite of many types of attacks is to obtain information about the network and security system. This knowledge is not only stored on computer disks; it also exists in the minds of people. Employees, contractors, suppliers, and customers represent part of the attack surface of any organization. Collectively, they're part of the attack surface referred to as the human vector.

Social engineering refers to eliciting information from someone or getting them to perform some action for the threat actor. It can also be referred to as "hacking the human." We'll look at some common vectors that highlight how cybercriminals exploit human psychology and communication channels to gain unauthorized access, steal sensitive information, or other goals. Knowing these techniques will help you to develop policies and other security controls to mitigate these risks.

Phishing 00:56-01:32

Phishing is a combination of social engineering and spoofing. A phishing message might try to convince the user to perform some action, such as installing disguised malware or allowing a remote access connection. Other types of phishing campaigns use a spoofed website set up to imitate a bank, e?commerce site, or some other web resource that should be trusted by the target. The attacker then emails users of the real website indicating their account must be updated or with a hoax alert or alarm, supplying a link to the spoofed site. When the user authenticates with the spoofed site, their login credentials are captured.

Smishing 01:32-01:48

Another variation on phishing is called smishing which uses SMS, or text messages instead of email. It's more difficult to determine if the links are spoofed due to the reduced screen and functionality. However, direct messages to a single contact have a high chance of failure.

Vishing 01:48-02:12

Next is vishing, short for "voice phishing," which uses phone calls or voice messages to manipulate individuals under the guise of a trusted entity. One high-profile example happened in 2021 when a branch manager received a call that he thought was from his director asking him to transfer $35 million for an acquisition. The voice on the phone sounded just like his director but was a computer-generated voice.

Impersonation 02:12-02:38

The next vector is impersonation, which simply means pretending to be someone else. It's one of the basic social engineering techniques. Impersonation is possible when the target can't easily verify the attacker's identity, such as over the phone or via an email message. The classic impersonation attack is for the social engineer to phone into a department, claim they have to adjust something on the user's system remotely, and then get the user to reveal their password.

Pretexting 02:38-03:09

To make the impersonation more credible, hackers will utilize pretexting. This attack vector involves creating a fabricated scenario (pretext) where they carefully craft a story with convincing or intimidating details. To be successful, they depend on obtaining privileged information about their target. Information that might seem innocuous—such as department employee lists, job titles, phone numbers, diaries, invoices, or purchase orders—can help an attacker penetrate an organization through impersonation.

Brand Impersonation 03:09-03:29

Another technique that overlaps with impersonation and pretexting is brand impersonation. Brand impersonation occurs when attackers create fake websites, emails, or social media profiles that mimic a legitimate brand's online presence. These fake assets are used to deceive individuals into providing personal information or credentials.

Business Email Compromise (BEC) 03:29-04:01

Business email compromise (BEC) is a more sophisticated variation of phishing that also employs impersonation. BEC refers to a sophisticated campaign that targets a specific individual within a company, typically an executive. To perpetrate this type of high-stakes attack, the threat actor might first try to gain control of a legitimate mail account to send the phishing messages. The threat actor is likely to perform reconnaissance to obtain a detailed understanding of the target and the best psychological approach and pretexts to trick them.

Disinformation and Misinformation 04:01-04:28

Disinformation/misinformation tactics could be used to create fake social media posts or referrers (sites that link to the fake site) to boost search ranking. Disinformation refers to a purposeful motivation to deceive. Misinformation refers to repeating false claims or rumors without the intention to deceive. A disinformation campaign might attempt to get others to repeat and amplify the false facts it creates as misinformation.

Watering Hole 04:28-04:55

A watering hole attack relies on a group of targets that use an unsecured third-party website. For example, a threat actor might discover that the staff running an international e-commerce site might use a local pizza delivery firm. An attacker can compromise the pizza delivery firm's website so that it runs exploit code on visitors. They may be able to infect the computers of the e-commerce company's employees and penetrate the e-commerce company's systems.

Typosquatting 04:55-05:24

Typosquatting means that the threat actor registers a domain name very similar to a real one, such as exannple.com, hoping that users won't notice the difference and assume they're browsing a trusted site or receiving email from a known source. Another technique is to register a hijacked subdomain using the primary domain of a trusted cloud provider, such as onmicrosoft.com. If a phishing message appears to come from example.onmicrosoft.com, many users will be inclined to trust it.

Summary 05:24-05:43

Well, that's it for this lesson. In this lesson, we looked at various ways that cybercriminals exploit human vectors that play on human nature through social engineering. The best defense against these types of attacks is training. Individuals and organizations that understand these methods will be more vigilant and less likely to fall prey to the attackers.